ËÑöÊú¨ÂêØÂä®‰∫é 2016Âπ¥09Êúà28Êó• ÊòüÊúü‰∏â 15Êó∂33ÂàÜ17Áßí
weikuan@bluenose:~/csci2132/a2$ exit[D[D[D[Dcat TomSawyer.txt |grep ^'s'[a-z\-]*'ing\b'|wc -l[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[K[D[Kcat TomSawyer.txt | egrep -e '[a-zA-Z]{5,}\b.*\s[a-zA-Z]{5,}\b.*\s[a-zA-Z]{5,}\b.*\n'
MOST of the adventures recorded in this book really occurred; one or two
The odd superstitions touched upon were all prevalent among children and
Although my book is intended mainly for the entertainment of boys and
girls, I hope it will not be shunned by men and women on that account,
and what queer enterprises they sometimes engaged in.
never looked THROUGH them for so small a thing as a boy; they were her
state pair, the pride of her heart, and were built for ``style,'' not
well. She looked perplexed for a moment, and then said, not fiercely,
under the bed with the broom, and so she needed breath to punctuate the
tomato vines and ``jimpson'' weeds that constituted the garden. No Tom.
So she lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for distance and
There was a slight noise behind her and she turned just in time to seize
a small boy by the slack of his roundabout and arrest his flight.
``There! I might 'a' thought of that closet. What you been doing in
The old lady whirled round, and snatched her skirts out of danger. The
lad fled on the instant, scrambled up the high board-fence, and
His aunt Polly stood surprised a moment, and then broke into a gentle
``Hang the boy, can't I never learn anything? Ain't he played me tricks
fools is the biggest fools there is. Can't learn an old dog new tricks,
he can torment me before I get my dander up, and he knows if he can make
out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh, it's all down again and
the Lord's truth, goodness knows. Spare the rod and spile the child, as
somehow. Every time I let him off, my conscience does hurt me so, and
every time I hit him my old heart most breaks. Well-a-well, man that is
and I reckon it's so. He'll play hookey this evening, * and [*
when all the boys is having holiday, but he hates work more than he
barely in season to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next-day's wood
and split the kindlings before supper -- at least he was there in time
While Tom was eating his supper, and stealing sugar as opportunity
offered, Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of guile, and
many other simple-hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she
was endowed with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she
A bit of a scare shot through Tom -- a touch of uncomfortable suspicion.
that she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing
where the wind lay, now. So he forestalled what might be the next move:
circumstantial evidence, and missed a trick. Then she had a new
``Bother! Well, go 'long with you. I'd made sure you'd played hookey and
been a-swimming. But I forgive ye, Tom. I reckon you're a kind of a
singed cat, as the saying is -- better'n you look. THIS time.''
She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom
had stumbled into obedient conduct for once.
In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into
the lapels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them -- one needle
carried white thread and the other black. He said:
because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him than a
misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises. This new
interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he had just acquired
from a negro, and he was suffering to practise it undisturbed. It
feels who has discovered a new planet -- no doubt, as far as strong,
deep, unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage was with the boy,
astounding. His cap was a dainty thing, his close-buttoned blue cloth
ribbon. He had a citified air about him that ate into Tom's vitals. The
more Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his nose
at his finery and the shabbier and shabbier his own outfit seemed to him
to grow. Neither boy spoke. If one moved, the other moved -- but only
Another pause, and more eying and sidling around each other. Presently
So they stood, each with a foot placed at an angle as a brace, and both
neither could get an advantage. After struggling till both were hot and
flushed, each relaxed his strain with watchful caution, and Tom said:
thrash you with his little finger, and I'll make him do it, too.''
The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out
with derision. Tom struck them to the ground. In an instant both boys
were rolling and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like cats; and
for the space of a minute they tugged and tore at each other's hair and
clothes, punched and scratched each other's nose, and covered themselves
with dust and glory. Presently the confusion took form, and through the
fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride the new boy, and pounding him
The boy only struggled to free himself. He was crying -- mainly from
``Now that'll learn you. Better look out who you're fooling with next
snuffling, and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and
To which Tom responded with jeers, and started off in high feather, and
and hit him between the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like an
antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out where he
enemy to come outside, but the enemy only made faces at him through the
window and declined. At last the enemy's mother appeared, and called Tom
a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away. So he went away; but
He got home pretty late that night, and when he climbed cautiously in at
the window, he uncovered an ambuscade, in the person of his aunt; and
when she saw the state his clothes were in her resolution to turn his
Saturday holiday into captivity at hard labor became adamantine in its
SATURDAY morning was come, and all the summer world was bright and
fresh, and brimming with life. There was a song in every heart; and if
the heart was young the music issued at the lips. There was cheer in
every face and a spring in every step. The locust-trees were in bloom
and the fragrance of the blossoms filled the air. Cardiff Hill, beyond
the village and above it, was green with vegetation and it lay just far
enough away to seem a Delectable Land, dreamy, reposeful, and inviting.
Tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of whitewash and a
long-handled brush. He surveyed the fence, and all gladness left him and
fence nine feet high. Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a
burden. Sighing, he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost
plank; repeated the operation; did it again; compared the insignificant
whitewashed streak with the far-reaching continent of unwhitewashed
now it did not strike him so. He remembered that there was company at
the pump. White, mulatto, and negro boys and girls were always there
waiting their turns, resting, trading playthings, quarrelling, fighting,
skylarking. And he remembered that although the pump was only a hundred
and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with a bucket of water under an
talks. Gimme the bucket -- I won't be gone only a a minute. SHE won't
interest while the bandage was being unwound. In another moment he was
whitewashing with vigor, and Aunt Polly was retiring from the field with
But Tom's energy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had
planned for this day, and his sorrows multiplied. Soon the free boys
would come tripping along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and
thought of it burnt him like fire. He got out his worldly wealth and
examined it -- bits of toys, marbles, and trash; enough to buy an
exchange of WORK, maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an
hour of pure freedom. So he returned his straitened means to his pocket,
hopeless moment an inspiration burst upon him! Nothing less than a
He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work. Ben Rogers hove in
sight presently -- the very boy, of all boys, whose ridicule he had been
heart was light and his anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and
giving a long, melodious whoop, at intervals, followed by a deep-toned
he drew near, he slackened speed, took the middle of the street, leaned
far over to star-board and rounded to ponderously and with laborious
pomp and circumstance -- for he was personating the Big Missouri, and
considered himself to be drawing nine feet of water. He was boat and
captain and engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself standing
on his own hurricane-deck giving the orders and executing them:
``Stop the stabboard! Ting-a-ling-ling! Stop the labboard! Come ahead on
-- out with your spring-line -- what're you about there! Take a turn
round that stump with the bight of it! Stand by that stage, now -- let
Tom went on whitewashing -- paid no attention to the steamboat. Ben
stared a moment and then said: ``Hi-YI! YOU'RE up a stump, ain't you!''
No answer. Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist, then
he gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result, as
That put the thing in a new light. Ben stopped nibbling his apple. Tom
swept his brush daintily back and forth -- stepped back to note the
effect -- added a touch here and there -- criticised the effect again --
Ben watching every move and getting more and more interested, more and
Tom considered, was about to consent; but he altered his mind:
``No -- no -- I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben. You see, Aunt Polly's
awful particular about this fence -- right here on the street, you know
she's awful particular about this fence; it's got to be done very
careful; I reckon there ain't one boy in a thousand, maybe two thousand,
``Ben, I'd like to, honest injun; but Aunt Polly -- well, Jim wanted to
Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face, but alacrity in his
heart. And while the late steamer Big Missouri worked and sweated in the
sun, the retired artist sat on a barrel in the shade close by, dangled
innocents. There was no lack of material; boys happened along every
kite, in good repair; and when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in
hour after hour. And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being a
poor poverty-stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling in
wealth. He had besides the things before mentioned, twelve marbles, part
cannon, a key that wouldn't unlock anything, a fragment of chalk, a
glass stopper of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple of tadpoles, six
fire-crackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass door-knob, a
and the fence had three coats of whitewash on it! If he hadn't run out
of whitewash he would have bankrupted every boy in the village.
had discovered a great law of human action, without knowing it --
namely, that in order to make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only
necessary to make the thing difficult to attain. If he had been a great
and wise philosopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have
comprehended that Work consists of whatever a body is OBLIGED to do, and
that Play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do. And this
performing on a tread-mill is work, while rolling ten-pins or climbing
Mont Blanc is only amusement. There are wealthy gentlemen in England who
drive four-horse passenger-coaches twenty or thirty miles on a daily
line, in the summer, because the privilege costs them considerable
money; but if they were offered wages for the service, that would turn
The boy mused awhile over the substantial change which had taken place
TOM presented himself before Aunt Polly, who was sitting by an open
window in a pleasant rearward apartment, which was bedroom,
breakfast-room, dining-room, and library, combined. The balmy summer
air, the restful quiet, the odor of the flowers, and the drowsing murmur
of the bees had had their effect, and she was nodding over her knitting
that of course Tom had deserted long ago, and she wondered at seeing him
place himself in her power again in this intrepid way. He said: ``Mayn't
Aunt Polly placed small trust in such evidence. She went out to see for
herself; and she would have been content to find twenty per cent. of
Tom's statement true. When she found the entire fence whitewashed, and
not only whitewashed but elaborately coated and recoated, and even a
streak added to the ground, her astonishment was almost unspeakable. She
``Well, I never! There's no getting round it, you can work when you're a
it's powerful seldom you're a mind to, I'm bound to say. Well, go 'long
into the closet and selected a choice apple and delivered it to him,
along with an improving lecture upon the added value and flavor a treat
took to itself when it came without sin through virtuous effort. And
that led to the back rooms on the second floor. Clods were handy and the
and sally to the rescue, six or seven clods had taken personal effect,
peace, now that he had settled with Sid for calling attention to his
black thread and getting him into trouble.
Tom skirted the block, and came round into a muddy alley that led by the
back of his aunt's cow-stable. He presently got safely beyond the reach
village, where two ``military'' companies of boys had met for conflict,
according to previous appointment. Tom was General of one of these
armies, Joe Harper (a bosom friend) General of the other. These two
great commanders did not condescend to fight in person -- that being
better suited to the still smaller fry -- but sat together on an
eminence and conducted the field operations by orders delivered through
aides-de-camp. Tom's army won a great victory, after a long and
hard-fought battle. Then the dead were counted, prisoners exchanged, the
terms of the next disagreement agreed upon, and the day for the
necessary battle appointed; after which the armies fell into line and
marched away, and Tom turned homeward alone.
As he was passing by the house where Jeff Thatcher lived, he saw a new
hair plaited into two long-tails, white summer frock and embroidered
pantalettes. The fresh-crowned hero fell without firing a shot. A
certain Amy Lawrence vanished out of his heart and left not even a
memory of herself behind. He had thought he loved her to distraction; he
had regarded his passion as adoration; and behold it was only a poor
little evanescent partiality. He had been months winning her; she had
confessed hardly a week ago; he had been the happiest and the proudest
boy in the world only seven short days, and here in one instant of time
discovered him; then he pretended he did not know she was present, and
began to ``show off'' in all sorts of absurd boyish ways, in order to
but by-and-by, while he was in the midst of some dangerous gymnastic
performances, he glanced aside and saw that the little girl was wending
her way toward the house. Tom came up to the fence and leaned on it,
grieving, and hoping she would tarry yet awhile longer. She halted a
away, for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment before she
The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower, and
he had discovered something of interest going on in that direction.
Presently he picked up a straw and began trying to balance it on his
in his efforts, he edged nearer and nearer toward the pansy; finally his
bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes closed upon it, and he hopped
away with the treasure and disappeared round the corner. But only for a
minute -- only while he could button the flower inside his jacket, next
his heart -- or next his stomach, possibly, for he was not much posted
He returned, now, and hung about the fence till nightfall, ``showing
off,'' as before; but the girl never exhibited herself again, though Tom
comforted himself a little with the hope that she had been near some
window, meantime, and been aware of his attentions. Finally he strode
All through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt wondered
``what had got into the child.'' He took a good scolding about clodding
Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid, happy in his immunity,
wellnigh unbearable. But Sid's fingers slipped and the bowl dropped and
broke. Tom was in ecstasies. In such ecstasies that he even controlled
his tongue and was silent. He said to himself that he would not speak a
asked who did the mischief; and then he would tell, and there would be
was so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold himself when the
old lady came back and stood above the wreck discharging lightnings of
wrath from over her spectacles. He said to himself, ``Now it's coming!''
And the next instant he was sprawling on the floor! The potent palm was
uplifted to strike again when Tom cried out:
Aunt Polly paused, perplexed, and Tom looked for healing pity. But when
other audacious mischief when I wasn't around, like enough.''
Then her conscience reproached her, and she yearned to say something
kind and loving; but she judged that this would be construed into a
Tom sulked in a corner and exalted his woes. He knew that in her heart
consciousness of it. He would hang out no signals, he would take notice
through a film of tears, but he refused recognition of it. He pictured
himself lying sick unto death and his aunt bending over him beseeching
one little forgiving word, but he would turn his face to the wall, and
himself brought home from the river, dead, with his curls all wet, and
his sore heart at rest. How she would throw herself upon him, and how
her boy and she would never, never abuse him any more! But he would lie
and his eyes swam in a blur of water, which overflowed when he winked,
him was this petting of his sorrows, that he could not bear to have any
worldly cheeriness or any grating delight intrude upon it; it was too
sacred for such contact; and so, presently, when his cousin Mary danced
in, all alive with the joy of seeing home again after an age-long visit
of one week to the country, he got up and moved in clouds and darkness
He wandered far from the accustomed haunts of boys, and sought desolate
places that were in harmony with his spirit. A log raft in the river
invited him, and he seated himself on its outer edge and contemplated
the dreary vastness of the stream, wishing, the while, that he could
only be drowned, all at once and unconsciously, without undergoing the
uncomfortable routine devised by nature. Then he thought of his flower.
He got it out, rumpled and wilted, and it mightily increased his dismal
felicity. He wondered if she would pity him if she knew? Would she cry,
This picture brought such an agony of pleasurable suffering that he
varied lights, till he wore it threadbare. At last he rose up sighing
where the Adored Unknown lived; he paused a moment; no sound fell upon
his listening ear; a candle was casting a dull glow upon the curtain of
a second-story window. Was the sacred presence there? He climbed the
fence, threaded his stealthy way through the plants, till he stood under
that window; he looked up at it long, and with emotion; then he laid him
down on the ground under it, disposing himself upon his back, with his
hands clasped upon his breast and holding his poor wilted flower. And
no loving face to bend pityingly over him when the great agony came. And
thus SHE would see him when she looked out upon the glad morning, and
she heave one little sigh to see a bright young life so rudely blighted,
The window went up, a maid-servant's discordant voice profaned the holy
calm, and a deluge of water drenched the prone martyr's remains!
The strangling hero sprang up with a relieving snort. There was a whiz
as of a missile in the air, mingled with the murmur of a curse, a sound
as of shivering glass followed, and a small, vague form went over the
better of it and held his peace, for there was danger in Tom's eye.
Tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers, and Sid made mental
THE sun rose upon a tranquil world, and beamed down upon the peaceful
village like a benediction. Breakfast over, Aunt Polly had family
worship: it began with a prayer built from the ground up of solid
courses of Scriptural quotations, welded together with a thin mortar of
Then Tom girded up his loins, so to speak, and went to work to ``get his
verses.'' Sid had learned his lesson days before. Tom bent all his
energies to the memorizing of five verses, and he chose part of the
Sermon on the Mount, because he could find no verses that were shorter.
but no more, for his mind was traversing the whole field of human
thought, and his hands were busy with distracting recreations. Mary took
``For THEIRS. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom
``Oh, SHALL! for they shall -- for they shall -- a -- a -- shall mourn
shall mourn, for they shall -- a -- shall WHAT? Why don't you tell me,
``Oh, Tom, you poor thick-headed thing, I'm not teasing you. I wouldn't
accomplished a shining success. Mary gave him a brand-new ``Barlow''
knife worth twelve and a half cents; and the convulsion of delight that
swept his system shook him to his foundations. True, the knife would not
inconceivable grandeur in that -- though where the Western boys ever got
the idea that such a weapon could possibly be counterfeited to its
injury is an imposing mystery and will always remain so, perhaps. Tom
contrived to scarify the cupboard with it, and was arranging to begin on
the bureau, when he was called off to dress for Sunday-school.
Mary gave him a tin basin of water and a piece of soap, and he went
outside the door and set the basin on a little bench there; then he
poured out the water on the ground, gently, and then entered the kitchen
and began to wipe his face diligently on the towel behind the door. But
``Now ain't you ashamed, Tom. You mustn't be so bad. Water won't hurt
Tom was a trifle disconcerted. The basin was refilled, and this time he
stood over it a little while, gathering resolution; took in a big breath
and began. When he entered the kitchen presently, with both eyes shut
and groping for the towel with his hands, an honorable testimony of suds
short at his chin and his jaws, like a mask; below and beyond this line
there was a dark expanse of unirrigated soil that spread downward in
front and backward around his neck. Mary took him in hand, and when she
color, and his saturated hair was neatly brushed, and its short curls
wrought into a dainty and symmetrical general effect. [He privately
smoothed out the curls, with labor and difficulty, and plastered his
hair close down to his head; for he held curls to be effeminate, and his
were simply called his ``other clothes'' -- and so by that we know the
dressed himself; she buttoned his neat roundabout up to his chin, turned
his vast shirt collar down over his shoulders, brushed him off and
crowned him with his speckled straw hat. He now looked exceedingly
improved and uncomfortable. He was fully as uncomfortable as he looked;
for there was a restraint about whole clothes and cleanliness that
blighted; she coated them thoroughly with tallow, as was the custom, and
brought them out. He lost his temper and said he was always being made
So he got into the shoes snarling. Mary was soon ready, and the three
service. Two of the children always remained for the sermon voluntarily,
and the other always remained too -- for stronger reasons. The church's
high-backed, uncushioned pews would seat about three hundred persons;
the edifice was but a small, plain affair, with a sort of pine board
Tom exhibited. They were satisfactory, and the property changed hands.
Then Tom traded a couple of white alleys for three red tickets, and some
small trifle or other for a couple of blue ones. He waylaid other boys
as they came, and went on buying tickets of various colors ten or
fifteen minutes longer. He entered the church, now, with a swarm of
clean and noisy boys and girls, proceeded to his seat and started a
elderly man, interfered; then turned his back a moment and Tom pulled a
turned around; stuck a pin in another boy, presently, in order to hear
class were of a pattern -- restless, noisy, and troublesome. When they
came to recite their lessons, not one of them knew his verses perfectly,
but had to be prompted all along. However, they worried through, and
recitation. Ten blue tickets equalled a red one, and could be exchanged
for it; ten red tickets equalled a yellow one; for ten yellow tickets
the superintendent gave a very plainly bound Bible (worth forty cents in
those easy times) to the pupil. How many of my readers would have the
industry and application to memorize two thousand verses, even for a
Dore Bible? And yet Mary had acquired two Bibles in this way -- it was
the patient work of two years -- and a boy of German parentage had won
four or five. He once recited three thousand verses without stopping;
but the strain upon his mental faculties was too great, and he was
little better than an idiot from that day forth -- a grievous misfortune
for the school, for on great occasions, before company, the
and ``spread himself.'' Only the older pupils managed to keep their
tickets and stick to their tedious work long enough to get a Bible, and
so the delivery of one of these prizes was a rare and noteworthy
circumstance; the successful pupil was so great and conspicuous for that
mental stomach had never really hungered for one of those prizes, but
unquestionably his entire being had for many a day longed for the glory
In due course the superintendent stood up in front of the pulpit, with a
closed hymn-book in his hand and his forefinger inserted between its
leaves, and commanded attention. When a Sunday-school superintendent
makes his customary little speech, a hymn-book in the hand is as
necessary as is the inevitable sheet of music in the hand of a singer
who stands forward on the platform and sings a solo at a concert --
though why, is a mystery: for neither the hymn-book nor the sheet of
music is ever referred to by the sufferer. This superintendent was a
slim creature of thirty-five, with a sandy goatee and short sandy hair;
and whose sharp points curved forward abreast the corners of his mouth
-- a fence that compelled a straight lookout ahead, and a turning of the
whole body when a side view was required; his chin was propped on a
spreading cravat which was as broad and as long as a bank-note, and had
fringed ends; his boot toes were turned sharply up, in the fashion of
the day, like sleigh-runners -- an effect patiently and laboriously
produced by the young men by sitting with their toes pressed against a
wall for hours together. Mr. Walters was very earnest of mien, and very
sincere and honest at heart; and he held sacred things and places in
intonation which was wholly absent on week-days. He began after this
thinks I am out there somewhere -- perhaps up in one of the trees making
a speech to the little birds. [Applausive titter.] I want to tell you
assembled in a place like this, learning to do right and be good.'' And
oration. It was of a pattern which does not vary, and so it is familiar
The latter third of the speech was marred by the resumption of fights
and other recreations among certain of the bad boys, and by fidgetings
and whisperings that extended far and wide, washing even to the bases of
isolated and incorruptible rocks like Sid and Mary. But now every sound
ceased suddenly, with the subsidence of Mr. Walters' voice, and the
conclusion of the speech was received with a burst of silent gratitude.
the latter's wife. The lady was leading a child. Tom had been restless
and full of chafings and repinings; conscience-smitten, too -- he could
not meet Amy Lawrence's eye, he could not brook her loving gaze. But
when he saw this small new-comer his soul was all ablaze with bliss in a
cuffing boys, pulling hair, making faces -- in a word, using every art
that seemed likely to fascinate a girl and win her applause. His
exaltation had but one alloy -- the memory of his humiliation in this
angel's garden -- and that record in sand was fast washing out, under
the waves of happiness that were sweeping over it now.
The visitors were given the highest seat of honor, and as soon as Mr.
Walters' speech was finished, he introduced them to the school. The
middle-aged man turned out to be a prodigious personage -- no less a one
than the county judge -- altogether the most august creation these
children had ever looked upon -- and they wondered what kind of material
upon the county court-house -- which was said to have a tin roof. The
awe which these reflections inspired was attested by the impressive
Thatcher, brother of their own lawyer. Jeff Thatcher immediately went
forward, to be familiar with the great man and be envied by the school.
shake hands with him -- he IS shaking hands with him! By jings, don't
bustlings and activities, giving orders, delivering judgments,
discharging directions here, there, everywhere that he could find a
target. The librarian ``showed off'' -- running hither and thither with
his arms full of books and making a deal of the splutter and fuss that
insect authority delights in. The young lady teachers ``showed off'' --
bending sweetly over pupils that were lately being boxed, lifting pretty
warning fingers at bad little boys and patting good ones lovingly. The
young gentlemen teachers ``showed off'' with small scoldings and other
little displays of authority and fine attention to discipline -- and
most of the teachers, of both sexes, found business up at the library,
by the pulpit; and it was business that frequently had to be done over
again two or three times (with much seeming vexation). The little girls
such diligence that the air was thick with paper wads and the murmur of
scufflings. And above it all the great man sat and beamed a majestic
judicial smile upon all the house, and warmed himself in the sun of his
and that was a chance to deliver a Bible-prize and exhibit a prodigy.
Several pupils had a few yellow tickets, but none had enough -- he had
been around among the star pupils inquiring. He would have given worlds,
now, to have that German lad back again with a sound mind.
nine yellow tickets, nine red tickets, and ten blue ones, and demanded a
Bible. This was a thunderbolt out of a clear sky. Walters was not
expecting an application from this source for the next ten years. But
there was no getting around it -- here were the certified checks, and
with the Judge and the other elect, and the great news was announced
from head-quarters. It was the most stunning surprise of the decade, and
so profound was the sensation that it lifted the new hero up to the
judicial one's altitude, and the school had two marvels to gaze upon in
themselves had contributed to this hated splendor by trading tickets to
Tom for the wealth he had amassed in selling whitewashing privileges.
These despised themselves, as being the dupes of a wily fraud, a
superintendent could pump up under the circumstances; but it lacked
that there was a mystery here that could not well bear the light,
thousand sheaves of Scriptural wisdom on his premises -- a dozen would
Amy Lawrence was proud and glad, and she tried to make Tom see it in her
a furtive glance told her worlds -- and then her heart broke, and she
was jealous, and angry, and the tears came and she hated everybody. Tom
greatness of the man, but mainly because he was her parent. He would
Judge put his hand on Tom's head and called him a fine little man, and
asked him what his name was. The boy stammered, gasped, and got it out:
``Tell the gentleman your other name, Thomas,'' said Walters, ``and say
thousand verses is a great many -- very, very great many. And you never
can be sorry for the trouble you took to learn them; for knowledge is
worth more than anything there is in the world; it's what makes great
precious Sunday-school privileges of my boyhood -- it's all owing to my
dear teachers that taught me to learn -- it's all owing to the good
superintendent, who encouraged me, and watched over me, and gave me a
beautiful Bible -- a splendid elegant Bible -- to keep and have it all
for my own, always -- it's all owing to right bringing up! That is what
thousand verses -- no indeed you wouldn't. And now you wouldn't mind
telling me and this lady some of the things you've learned -- no, I know
you wouldn't -- for we are proud of little boys that learn. Now, no
doubt you know the names of all the twelve disciples. Won't you tell us
Tom was tugging at a button-hole and looking sheepish. He blushed, now,
``Answer the gentleman, Thomas -- don't be afraid.''
ABOUT half-past ten the cracked bell of the small church began to ring,
and presently the people began to gather for the morning sermon. The
Sunday-school children distributed themselves about the house and
occupied pews with their parents, so as to be under supervision. Aunt
next the aisle, in order that he might be as far away from the open
window and the seductive outside summer scenes as possible. The crowd
filed up the aisles: the aged and needy postmaster, who had seen better
days; the mayor and his wife -- for they had a mayor there, among other
smart, and forty, a generous, good-hearted soul and well-to-do, her hill
mansion the only palace in the town, and the most hospitable and much
boast; the bent and venerable Major and Mrs. Ward; lawyer Riverson, the
a troop of lawn-clad and ribbon-decked young heart-breakers; then all
the young clerks in town in a body -- for they had stood in the
vestibule sucking their cane-heads, a circling wall of oiled and
simpering admirers, till the last girl had run their gantlet; and last
of all came the Model Boy, Willie Mufferson, taking as heedful care of
white handkerchief was hanging out of his pocket behind, as usual on
Sundays -- accidentally. Tom had no handkerchief, and he looked upon
The congregation being fully assembled, now, the bell rang once more, to
warn laggards and stragglers, and then a solemn hush fell upon the
church which was only broken by the tittering and whispering of the
choir in the gallery. The choir always tittered and whispered all
through service. There was once a church choir that was not ill-bred,
but I have forgotten where it was, now. It was a great many years ago,
and I can scarcely remember anything about it, but I think it was in
The minister gave out the hymn, and read it through with a relish, in a
peculiar style which was much admired in that part of the country. His
voice began on a medium key and climbed steadily up till it reached a
certain point, where it bore with strong emphasis upon the topmost word
others fight to win the prize, and sail thro' BLOOD y seas?
always called upon to read poetry; and when he was through, the ladies
would lift up their hands and let them fall helplessly in their laps,
After the hymn had been sung, the Rev. Mr. Sprague turned himself into a
bulletin-board, and read off ``notices'' of meetings and societies and
doom -- a queer custom which is still kept up in America, even in
cities, away here in this age of abundant newspapers. Often, the less
And now the minister prayed. A good, generous prayer it was, and went
into details: it pleaded for the church, and the little children of the
for the county; for the State; for the State officers; for the United
States; for the churches of the United States; for Congress; for the
by stormy seas; for the oppressed millions groaning under the heel of
withal; for the heathen in the far islands of the sea; and closed with a
supplication that the words he was about to speak might find grace and
favor, and be as seed sown in fertile ground, yielding in time a
There was a rustling of dresses, and the standing congregation sat down.
The boy whose history this book relates did not enjoy the prayer, he
it; he kept tally of the details of the prayer, unconsciously -- for he
regular route over it -- and when a little trifle of new matter was
interlarded, his ear detected it and his whole nature resented it; he
considered additions unfair, and scoundrelly. In the midst of the prayer
spirit by calmly rubbing its hands together, embracing its head with its
company with the body, and the slender thread of a neck was exposed to
sorely as Tom's hands itched to grab for it they did not dare -- he
believed his soul would be instantly destroyed if he did such a thing
while the prayer was going on. But with the closing sentence his hand
began to curve and steal forward; and the instant the ``Amen'' was out
The minister gave out his text and droned along monotonously through an
argument that was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod --
and yet it was an argument that dealt in limitless fire and brimstone
and thinned the predestined elect down to a company so small as to be
hardly worth the saving. Tom counted the pages of the sermon; after
church he always knew how many pages there had been, but he seldom knew
interested for a little while. The minister made a grand and moving
millennium when the lion and the lamb should lie down together and a
little child should lead them. But the pathos, the lesson, the moral of
conspicuousness of the principal character before the on-looking
wished he could be that child, if it was a tame lion.
Now he lapsed into suffering again, as the dry argument was resumed.
Presently he bethought him of a treasure he had and got it out. It was a
large black beetle with formidable jaws -- a ``pinchbug,'' he called it.
take him by the finger. A natural fillip followed, the beetle went
floundering into the aisle and lit on its back, and the hurt finger went
into the boy's mouth. The beetle lay there working its helpless legs,
of his reach. Other people uninterested in the sermon found relief in
idling along, sad at heart, lazy with the summer softness and the quiet,
weary of captivity, sighing for change. He spied the beetle; the
drooping tail lifted and wagged. He surveyed the prize; walked around
it; smelt at it from a safe distance; walked around it again; grew
bolder, and took a closer smell; then lifted his lip and made a gingerly
snatch at it, just missing it; made another, and another; began to enjoy
the diversion; subsided to his stomach with the beetle between his paws,
and continued his experiments; grew weary at last, and then indifferent
and absent-minded. His head nodded, and little by little his chin
with a gentle inward joy, several faces went behind fans and
handkerchiefs, and Tom was entirely happy. The dog looked foolish, and
probably felt so; but there was resentment in his heart, too, and a
craving for revenge. So he went to the beetle and began a wary attack on
it again; jumping at it from every point of a circle, lighting with his
fore-paws within an inch of the creature, making even closer snatches at
it with his teeth, and jerking his head till his ears flapped again. But
fly but found no relief; followed an ant around, with his nose close to
the floor, and quickly wearied of that; yawned, sighed, forgot the
beetle entirely, and sat down on it. Then there was a wild yelp of agony
and the poodle went sailing up the aisle; the yelps continued, and so
did the dog; he crossed the house in front of the altar; he flew down
home-stretch; his anguish grew with his progress, till presently he was
but a woolly comet moving in its orbit with the gleam and the speed of
light. At last the frantic sufferer sheered from its course, and sprang
into its master's lap; he flung it out of the window, and the voice of
distress quickly thinned away and died in the distance.
suppressed laughter, and the sermon had come to a dead standstill. The
discourse was resumed presently, but it went lame and halting, all
possibility of impressiveness being at an end; for even the gravest
unholy mirth, under cover of some remote pew-back, as if the poor parson
had said a rarely facetious thing. It was a genuine relief to the whole
congregation when the ordeal was over and the benediction pronounced.
Tom Sawyer went home quite cheerful, thinking to himself that there was
some satisfaction about divine service when there was a bit of variety
should play with his pinchbug, but he did not think it was upright in
MONDAY morning found Tom Sawyer miserable. Monday morning always found
him so -- because it began another week's slow suffering in school. He
generally began that day with wishing he had had no intervening holiday,
it made the going into captivity and fetters again so much more odious.
He canvassed his system. No ailment was found, and he investigated
again. This time he thought he could detect colicky symptoms, and he
began to encourage them with considerable hope. But they soon grew
feeble, and presently died wholly away. He reflected further. Suddenly
he discovered something. One of his upper front teeth was loose. This
was lucky; he was about to begin to groan, as a ``starter,'' as he
he would hold the tooth in reserve for the present, and seek further.
Nothing offered for some little time, and then he remembered hearing the
doctor tell about a certain thing that laid up a patient for two or
three weeks and threatened to make him lose a finger. So the boy eagerly
worth while to chance it, so he fell to groaning with considerable
Tom groaned louder, and fancied that he began to feel pain in the toe.
swelled himself up and fetched a succession of admirable groans.
worked well, and Tom began to groan again. Sid yawned, stretched, then
brought himself up on his elbow with a snort, and began to stare at Tom.
``I forgive you everything, Sid. [Groan.] Everything you've ever done to
But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone. Tom was suffering in reality,
now, so handsomely was his imagination working, and so his groans had
gathered quite a genuine tone.
The old lady sank down into a chair and laughed a little, then cried a
little, then did both together. This restored her and she said:
``Aunt Polly, it SEEMED mortified, and it hurt so I never minded my
``There, there, now, don't begin that groaning again. Open your mouth.
I may never stir if it does. Please don't, auntie. I don't want to stay
loop and tied the other to the bedpost. Then she seized the chunk of
fire and suddenly thrust it almost into the boy's face. The tooth hung
But all trials bring their compensations. As Tom wended to school after
breakfast, he was the envy of every boy he met because the gap in his
upper row of teeth enabled him to expectorate in a new and admirable
way. He gathered quite a following of lads interested in the exhibition;
and one that had cut his finger and had been a centre of fascination and
homage up to this time, now found himself suddenly without an adherent,
and shorn of his glory. His heart was heavy, and he said with a disdain
but another boy said, ``Sour grapes!'' and he wandered away a dismantled
Finn, son of the town drunkard. Huckleberry was cordially hated and
dreaded by all the mothers of the town, because he was idle and lawless
and vulgar and bad -- and because all their children admired him so, and
delighted in his forbidden society, and wished they dared to be like
Huckleberry his gaudy outcast condition, and was under strict orders not
Huckleberry was always dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-grown
when he wore one, hung nearly to his heels and had the rearward buttons
the trousers bagged low and contained nothing, the fringed legs dragged
in fine weather and in empty hogsheads in wet; he did not have to go to
school or to church, or call any being master or obey anybody; he could
go fishing or swimming when and where he chose, and stay as long as it
pleased; he was always the first boy that went barefoot in the spring
and the last to resume leather in the fall; he never had to wash, nor
put on clean clothes; he could swear wonderfully. In a word, everything
``Why, he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeff told Johnny Baker, and Johnny
told Jim Hollis, and Jim told Ben Rogers, and Ben told a nigger, and the
``Aha! Talk about trying to cure warts with spunk-water such a blame
all by yourself, to the middle of the woods, where you know there's a
spunk-water stump, and just as it's midnight you back up against the
'Barley-corn, barley-corn, injun-meal shorts, Spunk-water, spunk-water,
and then walk away quick, eleven steps, with your eyes shut, and then
turn around three times and walk home without speaking to anybody.
spunk-water. I've took off thousands of warts off of my hands that way,
Huck. I play with frogs so much that I've always got considerable many
that's got the blood on it will keep drawing and drawing, trying to
fetch the other piece to it, and so that helps the blood to draw the
That's the way Joe Harper does, and he's been nearly to Coonville and
midnight when somebody that was wicked has been buried; and when it's
midnight a devil will come, or maybe two or three, but you can't see
very night he rolled off'n a shed wher' he was a layin drunk, and broke
stiddy, they're a-witching you. Specially if they mumble. Becuz when
``To-night. I reckon they'll come after old Hoss Williams to-night.''
``But they buried him Saturday. Didn't they get him Saturday night?''
``Why, how you talk! How could their charms work till midnight? -- and
THEN it's Sunday. Devils don't slosh around much of a Sunday, I don't
a-meowing around till old Hays went to throwing rocks at me and says
'Dern that cat!' and so I hove a brick through his window -- but don't
``I won't. I couldn't meow that night, becuz auntie was watching me, but
``All right. It's a mighty small tick, anyway.''
``Sho, there's ticks a plenty. I could have a thousand of 'em if I
pretty early tick, I reckon. It's the first one I've seen this year.''
Tom enclosed the tick in the percussion-cap box that had lately been the
pinchbug's prison, and the boys separated, each feeling wealthier than
When Tom reached the little isolated frame school-house, he strode in
alacrity. The master, throned on high in his great splint-bottom
sympathy of love; and by that form was THE ONLY VACANT PLACE on the
The master's pulse stood still, and he stared helplessly. The buzz of
study ceased. The pupils wondered if this foolhardy boy had lost his
``Thomas Sawyer, this is the most astounding confession I have ever
listened to. No mere ferule will answer for this offence. Take off your
The master's arm performed until it was tired and the stock of switches
his unknown idol and the dread pleasure that lay in his high good
herself away from him with a toss of her head. Nudges and winks and
whispers traversed the room, but Tom sat still, with his arms upon the
cautiously faced around again, a peach lay before her. She thrust it
animosity. Tom patiently returned it to its place. Then she let it
something on the slate, hiding his work with his left hand. For a time
the girl refused to notice; but her human curiosity presently began to
manifest itself by hardly perceptible signs. The boy worked on,
Tom partly uncovered a dismal caricature of a house with two gable ends
to it and a corkscrew of smoke issuing from the chimney. Then the girl's
interest began to fasten itself upon the work and she forgot everything
else. When it was finished, she gazed a moment, then whispered:
could have stepped over the house; but the girl was not hypercritical;
Tom drew an hour-glass with a full moon and straw limbs to it and armed
the spreading fingers with a portentous fan. The girl said:
``Becky Thatcher. What's yours? Oh, I know. It's Thomas Sawyer.''
Now Tom began to scrawl something on the slate, hiding the words from
upon his and a little scuffle ensued, Tom pretending to resist in
Just at this juncture the boy felt a slow, fateful grip closing on his
ear, and a steady lifting impulse. In that vise he was borne across the
house and deposited in his own seat, under a peppering fire of giggles
from the whole school. Then the master stood over him during a few awful
moments, and finally moved away to his throne without saying a word. But
although Tom's ear tingled, his heart was jubilant.
turmoil within him was too great. In turn he took his place in the
reading class and made a botch of it; then in the geography class and
turned lakes into mountains, mountains into rivers, and rivers into
continents, till chaos was come again; then in the spelling class, and
up at the foot and yielded up the pewter medal which he had worn with
THE harder Tom tried to fasten his mind on his book, the more his ideas
The drowsing murmur of the five and twenty studying scholars soothed the
flaming sunshine, Cardiff Hill lifted its soft green sides through a
shimmering veil of heat, tinted with the purple of distance; a few birds
floated on lazy wing high in the air; no other living thing was visible
gratitude that was prayer, though he did not know it. Then furtively the
amounted to prayer, too, at this moment, but it was premature: for when
he started thankfully to travel off, Tom turned him aside with a pin and
Tom's bosom friend sat next him, suffering just as Tom had been, and now
he was deeply and gratefully interested in this entertainment in an
instant. This bosom friend was Joe Harper. The two boys were sworn
friends all the week, and embattled enemies on Saturdays. Joe took a pin
out of his lapel and began to assist in exercising the prisoner. The
sport grew in interest momently. Soon Tom said that they were
interfering with each other, and neither getting the fullest benefit of
harassed him awhile, and then he got away and crossed back again. This
change of base occurred often. While one boy was worrying the tick with
absorbing interest, the other would look on with interest as strong, the
two heads bowed together over the slate, and the two souls dead to all
things else. At last luck seemed to settle and abide with Joe. The tick
tried this, that, and the other course, and got as excited and as
victory in his very grasp, so to speak, and Tom's fingers would be
twitching to begin, Joe's pin would deftly head him off, and keep
possession. At last Tom could stand it no longer. The temptation was too
strong. So he reached out and lent a hand with his pin. Joe was angry in
A tremendous whack came down on Tom's shoulders, and its duplicate on
the two jackets and the whole school to enjoy it. The boys had been too
absorbed to notice the hush that had stolen upon the school awhile
before when the master came tiptoeing down the room and stood over them.
He had contemplated a good part of the performance before he contributed
When school broke up at noon, Tom flew to Becky Thatcher, and whispered
another. In a little while the two met at the bottom of the lane, and
when they reached the school they had it all to themselves. Then they
sat together, with a slate before them, and Tom gave Becky the pencil
and held her hand in his, guiding it, and so created another surprising
house. When the interest in art began to wane, the two fell to talking.
That was agreeable, so they chewed it turn about, and dangled their legs
against the bench in excess of contentment.
ain't shucks to a circus. There's things going on at a circus all the
time. I'm going to be a clown in a circus when I grow up.''
Becky hesitating, Tom took silence for consent, and passed his arm about
Then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks and benches,
white apron to her face. Tom clasped her about her neck and pleaded:
afraid of that -- it ain't anything at all. Please, Becky.'' And he
with the struggle, came up and submitted. Tom kissed the red lips and
``Now it's all done, Becky. And always after this, you know, you ain't
``No, I'll never love anybody but you, Tom, and I'll never marry anybody
``Certainly. Of course. That's PART of it. And always coming to school
anybody looking -- and you choose me and I choose you at parties,
Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she pushed him away and
turned her face to the wall, and went on crying. Tom tried again, with
soothing words in his mouth, and was repulsed again. Then his pride was
up, and he strode away and went outside. He stood about, restless and
uneasy, for a while, glancing at the door, every now and then, hoping
with him to make new advances, now, but he nerved himself to it and
entered. She was still standing back there in the corner, sobbing, with
moment, not knowing exactly how to proceed. Then he said hesitatingly:
Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass knob from the top of an andiron,
and passed it around her so that she could see it, and said:
She struck it to the floor. Then Tom marched out of the house and over
the hills and far away, to return to school no more that day. Presently
Becky began to suspect. She ran to the door; he was not in sight; she
She listened intently, but there was no answer. She had no companions
but silence and loneliness. So she sat down to cry again and upbraid
herself; and by this time the scholars began to gather again, and she
had to hide her griefs and still her broken heart and take up the cross
of a long, dreary, aching afternoon, with none among the strangers about
TOM dodged hither and thither through lanes until he was well out of the
track of returning scholars, and then fell into a moody jog. He crossed
a small ``branch'' two or three times, because of a prevailing juvenile
superstition that to cross water baffled pursuit. Half an hour later he
was disappearing behind the Douglas mansion on the summit of Cardiff
Hill, and the school-house was hardly distinguishable away off in the
valley behind him. He entered a dense wood, picked his pathless way to
the centre of it, and sat down on a mossy spot under a spreading oak.
There was not even a zephyr stirring; the dead noonday heat had even
stilled the songs of the birds; nature lay in a trance that was broken
by no sound but the occasional far-off hammering of a wood-pecker, and
this seemed to render the pervading silence and sense of loneliness the
more profound. The boy's soul was steeped in melancholy; his feelings
were in happy accord with his surroundings. He sat long with his elbows
and slumber and dream forever and ever, with the wind whispering through
the trees and caressing the grass and the flowers over the grave, and
nothing to bother and grieve about, ever any more. If he only had a
clean Sunday-school record he could be willing to go, and be done with
would be sorry some day -- maybe when it was too late. Ah, if he could
But the elastic heart of youth cannot be compressed into one constrained
shape long at a time. Tom presently began to drift insensibly back into
the concerns of this life again. What if he turned his back, now, and
unknown countries beyond the seas -- and never came back any more! How
would she feel then! The idea of being a clown recurred to him now, only
to fill him with disgust. For frivolity and jokes and spotted tights
were an offense, when they intruded themselves upon a spirit that was
exalted into the vague august realm of the romantic. No, he would be a
soldier, and return after long years, all war-worn and illustrious. No
-- better still, he would join the Indians, and hunt buffaloes and go on
the warpath in the mountain ranges and the trackless great plains of the
Far West, and away in the future come back a great chief, bristling with
feathers, hideous with paint, and prance into Sunday-school, some drowsy
summer morning, with a blood-curdling war-whoop, and sear the eyeballs
his future lay plain before him, and glowing with unimaginable splendor.
gloriously he would go plowing the dancing seas, in his long, low,
black-hulled racer, the Spirit of the Storm, with his grisly flag flying
at the old village and stalk into church, brown and weather-beaten, in
his black velvet doublet and trunks, his great jack-boots, his crimson
his side, his slouch hat with waving plumes, his black flag unfurled,
whisperings, ``It's Tom Sawyer the Pirate! -- the Black Avenger of the
Yes, it was settled; his career was determined. He would run away from
home and enter upon it. He would start the very next morning. Therefore
He went to a rotten log near at hand and began to dig under one end of
it with his Barlow knife. He soon struck wood that sounded hollow. He
and disclosed a shapely little treasure-house whose bottom and sides
were of shingles. In it lay a marble. Tom's astonishment was boundless!
Then he tossed the marble away pettishly, and stood cogitating. The
truth was, that a superstition of his had failed, here, which he and all
his comrades had always looked upon as infallible. If you buried a
marble with certain necessary incantations, and left it alone a
fortnight, and then opened the place with the incantation he had just
themselves together there, meantime, no matter how widely they had been
separated. But now, this thing had actually and unquestionably failed.
Tom's whole structure of faith was shaken to its foundations. He had
many a time heard of this thing succeeding but never of its failing
before, himself, but could never find the hiding-places afterward. He
on that point; so he searched around till he found a small sandy spot
with a little funnel-shaped depression in it. He laid himself down and
put his mouth close to this depression and called --
second and then darted under again in a fright.
He well knew the futility of trying to contend against witches, so he
the marble he had just thrown away, and therefore he went and made a
patient search for it. But he could not find it. Now he went back to his
treasure-house and carefully placed himself just as he had been standing
He watched where it stopped, and went there and looked. But it must have
repetition was successful. The two marbles lay within a foot of each
Just here the blast of a toy tin trumpet came faintly down the green
aisles of the forest. Tom flung off his jacket and trousers, turned a
suspender into a belt, raked away some brush behind the rotten log,
disclosing a rude bow and arrow, a lath sword and a tin trumpet, and in
a moment had seized these things and bounded away, barelegged, with
fluttering shirt. He presently halted under a great elm, blew an
answering blast, and then began to tiptoe and look warily out, this way
Now appeared Joe Harper, as airily clad and elaborately armed as Tom.
``I, indeed! I am Robin Hood, as thy caitiff carcase soon shall know.''
They took their lath swords, dumped their other traps on the ground,
struck a fencing attitude, foot to foot, and began a grave, careful
So they ``went it lively,'' panting and perspiring with the work. By and
There was no getting around the authorities, so Joe turned, received the
lam me with a quarter-staff; or I'll be the Sheriff of Nottingham and
you be Robin Hood a little while and kill me.''
This was satisfactory, and so these adventures were carried out. Then
Tom became Robin Hood again, and was allowed by the treacherous nun to
bleed his strength away through his neglected wound. And at last Joe,
representing a whole tribe of weeping outlaws, dragged him sadly forth,
falls, there bury poor Robin Hood under the greenwood tree.'' Then he
The boys dressed themselves, hid their accoutrements, and went off
grieving that there were no outlaws any more, and wondering what modern
civilization could claim to have done to compensate for their loss. They
said they would rather be outlaws a year in Sherwood Forest than
They said their prayers, and Sid was soon asleep. Tom lay awake and
waited, in restless impatience. When it seemed to him that it must be
nearly daylight, he heard the clock strike ten! This was despair. He
would have tossed and fidgeted, as his nerves demanded, but he was
afraid he might wake Sid. So he lay still, and stared up into the dark.
Everything was dismally still. By and by, out of the stillness, little,
scarcely preceptible noises began to emphasize themselves. The ticking
of the clock began to bring itself into notice. Old beams began to crack
mysteriously. The stairs creaked faintly. Evidently spirits were abroad.
A measured, muffled snore issued from Aunt Polly's chamber. And now the
tiresome chirping of a cricket that no human ingenuity could locate,
began. Next the ghastly ticking of a death-watch in the wall at the
answered by a fainter howl from a remoter distance. Tom was in an agony.
At last he was satisfied that time had ceased and eternity begun; he
began to doze, in spite of himself; the clock chimed eleven, but he did
a most melancholy caterwauling. The raising of a neighboring window
disturbed him. A cry of ``Scat! you devil!'' and the crash of an empty
and a single minute later he was dressed and out of the window and
woodshed and thence to the ground. Huckleberry Finn was there, with his
dead cat. The boys moved off and disappeared in the gloom. At the end of
about a mile and a half from the village. It had a crazy board fence
around it, which leaned inward in places, and outward the rest of the
time, but stood upright nowhere. Grass and weeds grew rank over the
whole cemetery. All the old graves were sunken in, there was not a
tombstone on the place; round-topped, worm-eaten boards staggered over
the graves, leaning for support and finding none. ``Sacred to the memory
A faint wind moaned through the trees, and Tom feared it might be the
little, and only under their breath, for the time and the place and the
pervading solemnity and silence oppressed their spirits. They found the
sharp new heap they were seeking, and ensconced themselves within the
protection of three great elms that grew in a bunch within a few feet of
Then they waited in silence for what seemed a long time. The hooting of
a distant owl was all the sound that troubled the dead stillness. Tom's
reflections grew oppressive. He must force some talk. So he said in a
``I wisht I knowed. It's awful solemn like, AIN'T it?''
There was a considerable pause, while the boys canvassed this matter
``Say, Hucky -- do you reckon Hoss Williams hears us talking?''
``I wish I'd said Mister Williams. But I never meant any harm. Everybody
Presently Tom seized his comrade's arm and said:
``Oh, don't be afeard. I don't believe they'll bother us. We ain't doing
any harm. If we keep perfectly still, maybe they won't notice us at
The boys bent their heads together and scarcely breathed. A muffled
sound of voices floated up from the far end of the graveyard.
Some vague figures approached through the gloom, swinging an
old-fashioned tin lantern that freckled the ground with innumerable
little spangles of light. Presently Huckleberry whispered with a
``It's the devils sure enough. Three of 'em! Lordy, Tom, we're goners!
``All right, I'll keep still. Now they're stuck. Can't find it. Here
The whisper died wholly out, now, for the three men had reached the
grave and stood within a few feet of the boys' hiding-place.
lantern up and revealed the face of young Doctor Robinson.
Potter and Injun Joe were carrying a handbarrow with a rope and a couple
of shovels on it. They cast down their load and began to open the grave.
The doctor put the lantern at the head of the grave and came and sat
They growled a response and went on digging. For some time there was no
noise but the grating sound of the spades discharging their freight of
mould and gravel. It was very monotonous. Finally a spade struck upon
the coffin with a dull woody accent, and within another minute or two
their shovels, got out the body and dumped it rudely on the ground. The
moon drifted from behind the clouds and exposed the pallid face. The
barrow was got ready and the corpse placed on it, covered with a
``Now the cussed thing's ready, Sawbones, and you'll just out with
your father's kitchen one night, when I come to ask for something to
a vagrant. Did you think I'd forget? The Injun blood ain't in me for
The doctor struck out suddenly and stretched the ruffian on the ground.
Potter dropped his knife, and exclaimed:
grappled with the doctor and the two were struggling with might and
main, trampling the grass and tearing the ground with their heels. Injun
Joe sprang to his feet, his eyes flaming with passion, snatched up
Potter's knife, and went creeping, catlike and stooping, round and round
about the combatants, seeking an opportunity. All at once the doctor
flung himself free, seized the heavy headboard of Williams' grave and
felled Potter to the earth with it -- and in the same instant the
half-breed saw his chance and drove the knife to the hilt in the young
man's breast. He reeled and fell partly upon Potter, flooding him with
spectacle and the two frightened boys went speeding away in the dark.
Presently, when the moon emerged again, Injun Joe was standing over the
two forms, contemplating them. The doctor murmured inarticulately, gave
Then he robbed the body. After which he put the fatal knife in Potter's
five minutes passed, and then Potter began to stir and moan. His hand
closed upon the knife; he raised it, glanced at it, and let it fall,
``It's a dirty business,'' said Joe, without moving.
``I thought I'd got sober. I'd no business to drink to-night. But it's
can't recollect anything of it, hardly. Tell me, Joe -- HONEST, now, old
feller -- did I do it? Joe, I never meant to -- 'pon my soul and honor,
I never meant to, Joe. Tell me how it was, Joe. Oh, it's awful -- and
like, and snatched the knife and jammed it into him, just as he fetched
reckon. I never used a weepon in my life before, Joe. I've fought, but
tell, Joe -- that's a good feller. I always liked you, Joe, and stood up
the poor creature dropped on his knees before the stolid murderer, and
``No, you've always been fair and square with me, Muff Potter, and I
Potter started on a trot that quickly increased to a run. The half-breed
had the look of being, he won't think of the knife till he's gone so far
Two or three minutes later the murdered man, the blanketed corpse, the
lidless coffin, and the open grave were under no inspection but the
that started up in their path seemed a man and an enemy, and made them
catch their breath; and as they sped by some outlying cottages that lay
``If we can only get to the old tannery before we break down!''
whispered Tom, in short catches between breaths. ``I can't stand it much
Huckleberry's hard pantings were his only reply, and the boys fixed
their eyes on the goal of their hopes and bent to their work to win it.
through the open door and fell grateful and exhausted in the sheltering
shadows beyond. By and by their pulses slowed down, and Tom whispered:
``If Doctor Robinson dies, I reckon hanging'll come of it.''
``What are you talking about? S'pose something happened and Injun Joe
``If anybody tells, let Muff Potter do it, if he's fool enough. He's
``Because he'd just got that whack when Injun Joe done it. D'you reckon
he could see anything? D'you reckon he knowed anything?''
``And besides, look-a-here -- maybe that whack done for HIM!''
``No, 'taint likely, Tom. He had liquor in him; I could see that; and
besides, he always has. Well, when pap's full, you might take and belt
was dead sober, I reckon maybe that whack might fetch him; I dono.''
After another reflective silence, Tom said:
``I'm agreed. It's the best thing. Would you just hold hands and swear
rubbishy common things -- specially with gals, cuz THEY go back on you
anyway, and blab if they get in a huff -- but there orter be writing
Tom's whole being applauded this idea. It was deep, and dark, and awful;
He picked up a clean pine shingle that lay in the moon-light, took a
little fragment of ``red keel'' out of his pocket, got the moon on his
work, and painfully scrawled these lines, emphasizing each slow
down-stroke by clamping his tongue between his teeth, and letting up the
``Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer swears they will keep mum about This and They
Huckleberry was filled with admiration of Tom's facility in writing, and
the sublimity of his language. He at once took a pin from his lapel and
``Hold on! Don't do that. A pin's brass. It might have verdigrease on
So Tom unwound the thread from one of his needles, and each boy pricked
the ball of his thumb and squeezed out a drop of blood. In time, after
many squeezes, Tom managed to sign his initials, using the ball of his
little finger for a pen. Then he showed Huckleberry how to make an H and
wall, with some dismal ceremonies and incantations, and the fetters that
bound their tongues were considered to be locked and the key thrown
A figure crept stealthily through a break in the other end of the ruined
They continued to whisper for some little time. Presently a dog set up a
long, lugubrious howl just outside -- within ten feet of them. The boys
clasped each other suddenly, in an agony of fright.
``Oh, lordy, I'm thankful!'' whispered Tom. ``I know his voice. It's
[* If Mr. Harbison owned a slave named Bull, Tom would have spoken of
The dog howled again. The boys' hearts sank once more.
whisper was hardly audible when he said:
``Oh, Tom, I reckon we're goners. I reckon there ain't no mistake 'bout
``Dad fetch it! This comes of playing hookey and doing everything a
I'll just WALLER in Sunday-schools!'' And Tom began to snuffle a little.
``YOU bad!'' and Huckleberry began to snuffle too. ``Consound it, Tom
``Sounds like -- like hogs grunting. No -- it's somebody snoring, Tom.''
sleep there, sometimes, 'long with the hogs, but laws bless you, he just
lifts things when HE snores. Besides, I reckon he ain't ever coming back
The spirit of adventure rose in the boys' souls once more.
Tom quailed. But presently the temptation rose up strong again and the
heels if the snoring stopped. So they went tiptoeing stealthily down,
snorer, Tom stepped on a stick, and it broke with a sharp snap. The man
moaned, writhed a little, and his face came into the moonlight. It was
Muff Potter. The boys' hearts had stood still, and their hopes too, when
the man moved, but their fears passed away now. They tiptoed out,
through the broken weather-boarding, and stopped at a little distance to
exchange a parting word. That long, lugubrious howl rose on the night
air again! They turned and saw the strange dog standing within a few
feet of where Potter was lying, and FACING Potter, with his nose
``Say, Tom -- they say a stray dog come howling around Johnny Miller's
house, 'bout midnight, as much as two weeks ago; and a whippoorwill come
in the kitchen fire and burn herself terrible the very next Saturday?''
Potter's a goner. That's what the niggers say, and they know all about
Then they separated, cogitating. When Tom crept in at his bedroom window
the night was almost spent. He undressed with excessive caution, and
fell asleep congratulating himself that nobody knew of his escapade. He
was not aware that the gently-snoring Sid was awake, and had been so for
When Tom awoke, Sid was dressed and gone. There was a late look in the
light, a late sense in the atmosphere. He was startled. Why had he not
him with bodings. Within five minutes he was dressed and down-stairs,
finished breakfast. There was no voice of rebuke; but there were averted
up-hill work; it roused no smile, no response, and he lapsed into
After breakfast his aunt took him aside, and Tom almost brightened in
This was worse than a thousand whippings, and Tom's heart was sorer now
over and over again, and then received his dismissal, feeling that he
unnecessary. He moped to school gloomy and sad, and took his flogging,
of one whose heart was busy with heavier woes and wholly dead to
trifles. Then he betook himself to his seat, rested his elbows on his
stare of suffering that has reached the limit and can no further go. His
elbow was pressing against some hard substance. After a long time he
slowly and sadly changed his position, and took up this object with a
sigh followed, and his heart broke. It was his brass andiron knob!
CLOSE upon the hour of noon the whole village was suddenly electrified
holiday for that afternoon; the town would have thought strangely of him
A gory knife had been found close to the murdered man, and it had been
recognized by somebody as belonging to Muff Potter -- so the story ran.
And it was said that a belated citizen had come upon Potter washing
himself in the ``branch'' about one or two o'clock in the morning, and
that Potter had at once sneaked off -- suspicious circumstances,
especially the washing which was not a habit with Potter. It was also
are not slow in the matter of sifting evidence and arriving at a
verdict), but that he could not be found. Horsemen had departed down all
the roads in every direction, and the Sheriff ``was confident'' that he
would be captured before night.
vanished and he joined the procession, not because he would not a
thousand times rather go anywhere else, but because an awful,
wormed his small body through the crowd and saw the dismal spectacle. It
seemed to him an age since he was there before. Somebody pinched his
elsewhere at once, and wondered if anybody had noticed anything in their
mutual glance. But everybody was talking, and intent upon the grisly
``Poor fellow!'' ``Poor young fellow!'' ``This ought to be a lesson to
grave robbers!'' ``Muff Potter'll hang for this if they catch him!''
face of Injun Joe. At this moment the crowd began to sway and struggle,
``Hallo, he's stopped! -- Look out, he's turning! Don't let him get
People in the branches of the trees over Tom's head said he wasn't
trying to get away -- he only looked doubtful and perplexed.
``Infernal impudence!'' said a bystander; ``wanted to come and take a
quiet look at his work, I reckon -- didn't expect any company.''
The crowd fell apart, now, and the Sheriff came through, ostentatiously
leading Potter by the arm. The poor fellow's face was haggard, and his
murdered man, he shook as with a palsy, and he put his face in his hands
``I didn't do it, friends,'' he sobbed; ``'pon my word and honor I never
This shot seemed to carry home. Potter lifted his face and looked around
him with a pathetic hopelessness in his eyes. He saw Injun Joe, and
Potter would have fallen if they had not caught him and eased him to the
then waved his nerveless hand with a vanquished gesture and said, ``Tell
Then Huckleberry and Tom stood dumb and staring, and heard the
stony-hearted liar reel off his serene statement, they expecting every
moment that the clear sky would deliver God's lightnings upon his head,
and wondering to see how long the stroke was delayed. And when he had
finished and still stood alive and whole, their wavering impulse to
break their oath and save the poor betrayed prisoner's life faded and
vanished away, for plainly this miscreant had sold himself to Satan and
``I couldn't help it -- I couldn't help it,'' Potter moaned. ``I wanted
Injun Joe repeated his statement, just as calmly, a few minutes
afterward on the inquest, under oath; and the boys, seeing that the
lightnings were still withheld, were confirmed in their belief that Joe
balefully interesting object they had ever looked upon, and they could
They inwardly resolved to watch him nights, when opportunity should
Injun Joe helped to raise the body of the murdered man and put it in a
wagon for removal; and it was whispered through the shuddering crowd
circumstance would turn suspicion in the right direction; but they were
``It was within three feet of Muff Potter when it done it.''
Tom's fearful secret and gnawing conscience disturbed his sleep for as
Everything was swimming before Tom. There is no telling what might have
happened, now, but luckily the concern passed out of Aunt Polly's face
``Sho! It's that dreadful murder. I dream about it most every night
myself. Sometimes I dream it's me that done it.''
Tom got out of the presence as quick as he plausibly could, and after
night. He never knew that Sid lay nightly watching, and frequently
slipped the bandage free and then leaned on his elbow listening a good
while at a time, and afterward slipped the bandage back to its place
again. Tom's distress of mind wore off gradually and the toothache grew
irksome and was discarded. If Sid really managed to make anything out of
It seemed to Tom that his schoolmates never would get done holding
inquests on dead cats, and thus keeping his trouble present to his mind.
Sid noticed that Tom never was coroner at one of these inquiries, though
noticed, too, that Tom never acted as a witness -- and that was strange;
and Sid did not overlook the fact that Tom even showed a marked aversion
to these inquests, and always avoided them when he could. Sid marvelled,
but said nothing. However, even inquests went out of vogue at last, and
opportunity and went to the little grated jail-window and smuggled such
jail was a trifling little brick den that stood in a marsh at the edge
of the village, and no guards were afforded for it; indeed, it was
seldom occupied. These offerings greatly helped to ease Tom's
The villagers had a strong desire to tar-and-feather Injun Joe and ride
that nobody could be found who was willing to take the lead in the
matter, so it was dropped. He had been careful to begin both of his
inquest-statements with the fight, without confessing the grave-robbery
that preceded it; therefore it was deemed wisest not to try the case in
troubles was, that it had found a new and weighty matter to interest
itself about. Becky Thatcher had stopped coming to school. Tom had
struggled with his pride a few days, and tried to ``whistle her down the
wind,'' but failed. He began to find himself hanging around her father's
should die! There was distraction in the thought. He no longer took an
interest in war, nor even in piracy. The charm of life was gone; there
infatuated with patent medicines and all new-fangled methods of
producing health or mending it. She was an inveterate experimenter in
these things. When something fresh in this line came out she was in a
fever, right away, to try it; not on herself, for she was never ailing,
``Health'' periodicals and phrenological frauds; and the solemn
ignorance they were inflated with was breath to her nostrils. All the
``rot'' they contained about ventilation, and how to go to bed, and how
health-journals of the current month customarily upset everything they
had recommended the month before. She was as simple-hearted and honest
together her quack periodicals and her quack medicines, and thus armed
with death, went about on her pale horse, metaphorically speaking, with
``hell following after.'' But she never suspected that she was not an
angel of healing and the balm of Gilead in disguise, to the suffering
The water treatment was new, now, and Tom's low condition was a windfall
to her. She had him out at daylight every morning, stood him up in the
wood-shed and drowned him with a deluge of cold water; then she scrubbed
rolled him up in a wet sheet and put him away under blankets till she
sweated his soul clean and ``the yellow stains of it came through his
pale and dejected. She added hot baths, sitz baths, shower baths, and
plunges. The boy remained as dismal as a hearse. She began to assist the
filled the old lady's heart with consternation. This indifference must
treatment and everything else, and pinned her faith to Pain-killer. She
gave Tom a teaspoonful and watched with the deepest anxiety for the
result. Her troubles were instantly at rest, her soul at peace again;
for the ``indifference'' was broken up. The boy could not have shown a
wilder, heartier interest, if she had built a fire under him.
romantic enough, in his blighted condition, but it was getting to have
thought over various plans for relief, and finally hit pon that of
became a nuisance, and his aunt ended by telling him to help himself and
clandestinely. She found that the medicine did really diminish, but it
did not occur to her that the boy was mending the health of a crack in
cat came along, purring, eying the teaspoon avariciously, and begging
``Now you've asked for it, and I'll give it to you, because there ain't
Peter was agreeable. So Tom pried his mouth open and poured down the
Pain-killer. Peter sprang a couple of yards in the air, and then
delivered a war-whoop and set off round and round the room, banging
against furniture, upsetting flower-pots, and making general havoc. Next
he rose on his hind feet and pranced around, in a frenzy of enjoyment,
unappeasable happiness. Then he went tearing around the house again
spreading chaos and destruction in his path. Aunt Polly entered in time
to see him throw a few double summersets, deliver a final mighty hurrah,
with him. The old lady stood petrified with astonishment, peering over
teaspoon was visible under the bed-valance. Aunt Polly took it, held it
roasted his bowels out of him 'thout any more feeling than if he was a
Aunt Polly felt a sudden pang of remorse. This was putting the thing in
She began to soften; she felt sorry. Her eyes watered a little, and she
Tom looked up in her face with just a perceptible twinkle peeping
``Oh, go 'long with you, Tom, before you aggravate me again. And you try
Tom reached school ahead of time. It was noticed that this strange thing
had been occurring every day latterly. And now, as usual of late, he
hung about the gate of the schoolyard instead of playing with his
looking everywhere but whither he really was looking -- down the road.
Presently Jeff Thatcher hove in sight, and Tom's face lighted; he gazed
a moment, and then turned sorrowfully away. When Jeff arrived, Tom
Becky, but the giddy lad never could see the bait. Tom watched and
watched, hoping whenever a frisking frock came in sight, and hating the
ceased to appear, and he dropped hopelessly into the dumps; he entered
the empty schoolhouse and sat down to suffer. Then one more frock passed
in at the gate, and Tom's heart gave a great bound. The next instant he
was out, and ``going on'' like an Indian; yelling, laughing, chasing
handsprings, standing on his head -- doing all the heroic things he
if Becky Thatcher was noticing. But she seemed to be unconscious of it
all; she never looked. Could it be possible that she was not aware that
he was there? He carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity; came
schoolhouse, broke through a group of boys, tumbling them in every
direction, and fell sprawling, himself, under Becky's nose, almost
her say: ``Mf! some people think they're mighty smart -- always showing
Tom's cheeks burned. He gathered himself up and sneaked off, crushed and
forsaken, friendless boy, he said; nobody loved him; when they found out
to do right and get along, but they would not let him; since nothing
``take up'' tinkled faintly upon his ear. He sobbed, now, to think he
should never, never hear that old familiar sound any more -- it was very
hard, but it was forced on him; since he was driven out into the cold
world, he must submit -- but he forgave them. Then the sobs came thick
hard-eyed, and with evidently a great and dismal purpose in his heart.
Plainly here were ``two souls with but a single thought.'' Tom, wiping
his eyes with his sleeve, began to blubber out something about a
resolution to escape from hard usage and lack of sympathy at home by
roaming abroad into the great world never to return; and ended by hoping
But it transpired that this was a request which Joe had just been going
had whipped him for drinking some cream which he had never tasted and
knew nothing about; it was plain that she was tired of him and wished
succumb; he hoped she would be happy, and never regret having driven her
poor boy out into the unfeeling world to suffer and die.
As the two boys walked sorrowing along, they made a new compact to stand
them of their troubles. Then they began to lay their plans. Joe was for
being a hermit, and living on crusts in a remote cave, and dying, some
conceded that there were some conspicuous advantages about a life of
Three miles below St. Petersburg, at a point where the Mississippi River
was a trifle over a mile wide, there was a long, narrow, wooded island,
shore, abreast a dense and almost wholly unpeopled forest. So Jackson's
matter that did not occur to them. Then they hunted up Huckleberry Finn,
and he joined them promptly, for all careers were one to him; he was
indifferent. They presently separated to meet at a lonely spot on the
midnight. There was a small log raft there which they meant to capture.
Each would bring hooks and lines, and such provision as he could steal
in the most dark and mysterious way -- as became outlaws. And before the
spreading the fact that pretty soon the town would ``hear something.''
About midnight Tom arrived with a boiled ham and a few trifles, and
stopped in a dense undergrowth on a small bluff overlooking the
like an ocean at rest. Tom listened a moment, but no sound disturbed the
quiet. Then he gave a low, distinct whistle. It was answered from under
the bluff. Tom whistled twice more; these signals were answered in the
``Tom Sawyer, the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main. Name your names.''
Two hoarse whispers delivered the same awful word simultaneously to the
Then Tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let himself down after it,
tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in the effort. There was an
easy, comfortable path along the shore under the bluff, but it lacked
The Terror of the Seas had brought a side of bacon, and had about worn
himself out with getting it there. Finn the Red-Handed had stolen a
skillet and a quantity of half-cured leaf tobacco, and had also brought
``chewed'' but himself. The Black Avenger of the Spanish Main said it
matches were hardly known there in that day. They saw a fire smouldering
upon a great raft a hundred yards above, and they went stealthily
thither and helped themselves to a chunk. They made an imposing
adventure of it, saying, ``Hist!'' every now and then, and suddenly
halting with finger on lip; moving with hands on imaginary dagger-hilts;
laying in stores or having a spree, but still that was no excuse for
their conducting this thing in an unpiratical way.
They shoved off, presently, Tom in command, Huck at the after oar and
Joe at the forward. Tom stood amidships, gloomy-browed, and with folded
it was no doubt understood that these orders were given only for
``style,'' and were not intended to mean anything in particular.
``Shake out that maintogalans'l! Sheets and braces! NOW my hearties!''
The raft drew beyond the middle of the river; the boys pointed her head
right, and then lay on their oars. The river was not high, so there was
not more than a two or three mile current. Hardly a word was said during
unconscious of the tremendous event that was happening. The Black
Avenger stood still with folded arms, ``looking his last'' upon the
scene of his former joys and his later sufferings, and wishing ``she''
could see him now, abroad on the wild sea, facing peril and death with
dauntless heart, going to his doom with a grim smile on his lips. It was
but a small strain on his imagination to remove Jackson's Island beyond
satisfied heart. The other pirates were looking their last, too; and
them out of the range of the island. But they discovered the danger in
time, and made shift to avert it. About two o'clock in the morning the
raft grounded on the bar two hundred yards above the head of the island,
and they waded back and forth until they had landed their freight. Part
of the little raft's belongings consisted of an old sail, and this they
spread over a nook in the bushes for a tent to shelter their provisions;
but they themselves would sleep in the open air in good weather, as
They built a fire against the side of a great log twenty or thirty steps
within the sombre depths of the forest, and then cooked some bacon in
they had brought. It seemed glorious sport to be feasting in that wild,
free way in the virgin forest of an unexplored and uninhabited island,
far from the haunts of men, and they said they never would return to
civilization. The climbing fire lit up their faces and threw its ruddy
glare upon the pillared tree-trunks of their forest temple, and upon the
varnished foliage and festooning vines.
When the last crisp slice of bacon was gone, and the last allowance of
corn pone devoured, the boys stretched themselves out on the grass,
filled with contentment. They could have found a cooler place, but they
would not deny themselves such a romantic feature as the roasting
``I reckon so,'' said Huckleberry; ``anyways, I'm suited. I don't want
nothing better'n this. I don't ever get enough to eat, gen'ally -- and
blame foolishness. You see a pirate don't have to do ANYTHING, Joe, when
he's ashore, but a hermit HE has to be praying considerable, and then he
they used to in old times, but a pirate's always respected. And a
hermit's got to sleep on the hardest place he can find, and put
sackcloth and ashes on his head, and stand out in the rain, and --''
The Red-Handed made no response, being better employed. He had finished
tobacco, and was pressing a coal to the charge and blowing a cloud of
fragrant smoke -- he was in the full bloom of luxurious contentment. The
other pirates envied him this majestic vice, and secretly resolved to
the money and bury it in awful places in their island where there's
ghosts and things to watch it, and kill everybody in the ships -- make
``And they carry the women to the island,'' said Joe; ``they don't kill
regretful pathos in his voice; ``but I ain't got none but these.''
But the other boys told him the fine clothes would come fast enough,
after they should have begun their adventures. They made him understand
Gradually their talk died out and drowsiness began to steal upon the
eyelids of the little waifs. The pipe dropped from the fingers of the
Red-Handed, and he slept the sleep of the conscience-free and the weary.
The Terror of the Seas and the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main had
more difficulty in getting to sleep. They said their prayers inwardly,
and lying down, since there was nobody there with authority to make them
kneel and recite aloud; in truth, they had a mind not to say them at
might call down a sudden and special thunderbolt from heaven. Then at
once they reached and hovered upon the imminent verge of sleep -- but an
began to feel a vague fear that they had been doing wrong to run away;
came. They tried to argue it away by reminding conscience that they had
purloined sweetmeats and apples scores of times; but conscience was not
to be appeased by such thin plausibilities; it seemed to them, in the
end, that there was no getting around the stubborn fact that taking
sweetmeats was only ``hooking,'' while taking bacon and hams and such
valuables was plain simple stealing -- and there was a command against
that in the Bible. So they inwardly resolved that so long as they
remained in the business, their piracies should not again be sullied
with the crime of stealing. Then conscience granted a truce, and these
WHEN Tom awoke in the morning, he wondered where he was. He sat up and
rubbed his eyes and looked around. Then he comprehended. It was the cool
gray dawn, and there was a delicious sense of repose and peace in the
deep pervading calm and silence of the woods. Not a leaf stirred; not a
sound obtruded upon great Nature's meditation. Beaded dewdrops stood
and a thin blue breath of smoke rose straight into the air. Joe and Huck
Now, far away in the woods a bird called; another answered; presently
the morning whitened, and as gradually sounds multiplied and life
manifested itself. The marvel of Nature shaking off sleep and going to
work unfolded itself to the musing boy. A little green worm came
from time to time and ``sniffing around,'' then proceeding again -- for
accord, he sat as still as a stone, with his hopes rising and falling,
by turns, as the creature still came toward him or seemed inclined to go
elsewhere; and when at last it considered a painful moment with its
began a journey over him, his whole heart was glad -- for that meant
a doubt a gaudy piratical uniform. Now a procession of ants appeared,
from nowhere in particular, and went about their labors; one struggled
manfully by with a dead spider five times as big as itself in its arms,
the dizzy height of a grass blade, and Tom bent down close to it and
credulous about conflagrations, and he had practised upon its simplicity
more than once. A tumblebug came next, heaving sturdily at its ball, and
Tom touched the creature, to see it shut its legs against its body and
pretend to be dead. The birds were fairly rioting by this time. A
catbird, the Northern mocker, lit in a tree over Tom's head, and trilled
out her imitations of her neighbors in a rapture of enjoyment; then a
shrill jay swept down, a flash of blue flame, and stopped on a twig
almost within the boy's reach, cocked his head to one side and eyed the
strangers with a consuming curiosity; a gray squirrel and a big fellow
of the ``fox'' kind came skurrying along, sitting up at intervals to
inspect and chatter at the boys, for the wild things had probably never
seen a human being before and scarcely knew whether to be afraid or not.
All Nature was wide awake and stirring, now; long lances of sunlight
pierced down through the dense foliage far and near, and a few
Tom stirred up the other pirates and they all clattered away with a
shout, and in a minute or two were stripped and chasing after and
sandbar. They felt no longing for the little village sleeping in the
distance beyond the majestic waste of water. A vagrant current or a
slight rise in the river had carried off their raft, but this only
gratified them, since its going was something like burning the bridge
ravenous; and they soon had the camp-fire blazing up again. Huck found a
spring of clear cold water close by, and the boys made cups of broad oak
or hickory leaves, and felt that water, sweetened with such a wildwood
was slicing bacon for breakfast, Tom and Huck asked him to hold on a
minute; they stepped to a promising nook in the river-bank and threw in
their lines; almost immediately they had reward. Joe had not had time to
get impatient before they were back again with some handsome bass, a
couple of sun-perch and a small catfish -- provisions enough for quite a
family. They fried the fish with the bacon, and were astonished; for no
fish had ever seemed so delicious before. They did not know that the
he is; and they reflected little upon what a sauce open-air sleeping,
open-air exercise, bathing, and a large ingredient of hunger make, too.
and then went off through the woods on an exploring expedition. They
tramped gayly along, over decaying logs, through tangled underbrush,
among solemn monarchs of the forest, hung from their crowns to the
ground with a drooping regalia of grape-vines. Now and then they came
upon snug nooks carpeted with grass and jeweled with flowers.
They found plenty of things to be delighted with, but nothing to be
was only separated from it by a narrow channel hardly two hundred yards
wide. They took a swim about every hour, so it was close upon the middle
and then died. The stillness, the solemnity that brooded in the woods,
and the sense of loneliness, began to tell upon the spirits of the boys.
They fell to thinking. A sort of undefined longing crept upon them. This
took dim shape, presently -- it was budding homesickness. Even Finn the
Red-Handed was dreaming of his doorsteps and empty hogsheads. But they
were all ashamed of their weakness, and none was brave enough to speak
sound in the distance, just as one sometimes is of the ticking of a
clock which he takes no distinct note of. But now this mysterious sound
became more pronounced, and forced a recognition. The boys started,
glanced at each other, and then each assumed a listening attitude. There
was a long silence, profound and unbroken; then a deep, sullen boom came
They sprang to their feet and hurried to the shore toward the town. They
steam ferry-boat was about a mile below the village, drifting with the
many skiffs rowing about or floating with the stream in the neighborhood
of the ferryboat, but the boys could not determine what the men in them
dull throb of sound was borne to the listeners again.
got drownded; they shoot a cannon over the water, and that makes him
quicksilver in 'em and set 'em afloat, and wherever there's anybody
that's drownded, they'll float right there and stop.''
Of COURSE they do. Anybody might know that.''
The other boys agreed that there was reason in what Tom said, because an
ignorant lump of bread, uninstructed by an incantation, could not be
The boys still listened and watched. Presently a revealing thought
were missed; they were mourned; hearts were breaking on their account;
tears were being shed; accusing memories of unkindness to these poor
lost lads were rising up, and unavailing regrets and remorse were being
indulged; and best of all, the departed were the talk of the whole town,
As twilight drew on, the ferryboat went back to her accustomed business
and the skiffs disappeared. The pirates returned to camp. They were
jubilant with vanity over their new grandeur and the illustrious trouble
they were making. They caught fish, cooked supper and ate it, and then
fell to guessing at what the village was thinking and saying about them;
and the pictures they drew of the public distress on their account were
gratifying to look upon -- from their point of view. But when the
shadows of night closed them in, they gradually ceased to talk, and sat
gazing into the fire, with their minds evidently wandering elsewhere.
thoughts of certain persons at home who were not enjoying this fine
frolic as much as they were. Misgivings came; they grew troubled and
unhappy; a sigh or two escaped, unawares. By and by Joe timidly ventured
upon a roundabout ``feeler'' as to how the others might look upon a
return to civilization -- not right now, but --
Tom withered him with derision! Huck, being uncommitted as yet, joined
out of the scrape with as little taint of chicken-hearted home-sickness
clinging to his garments as he could. Mutiny was effectually laid to
As the night deepened, Huck began to nod, and presently to snore. Joe
watching the two intently. At last he got up cautiously, on his knees,
and went searching among the grass and the flickering reflections flung
semi-cylinders of the thin white bark of a sycamore, and finally chose
two which seemed to suit him. Then he knelt by the fire and painfully
wrote something upon each of these with his ``red keel''; one he rolled
up and put in his jacket pocket, and the other he put in Joe's hat and
removed it to a little distance from the owner. And he also put into the
hat certain schoolboy treasures of almost inestimable value -- among
them a lump of chalk, an India-rubber ball, three fishhooks, and one of
that kind of marbles known as a ``sure 'nough crystal.'' Then he tiptoed
hearing, and straightway broke into a keen run in the direction of the
A FEW minutes later Tom was in the shoal water of the bar, wading toward
over; the current would permit no more wading, now, so he struck out
confidently to swim the remaining hundred yards. He swam quartering
upstream, but still was swept downward rather faster than he had
expected. However, he reached the shore finally, and drifted along till
he found a low place and drew himself out. He put his hand on his jacket
pocket, found his piece of bark safe, and then struck through the woods,
following the shore, with streaming garments. Shortly before ten o'clock
he came out into an open place opposite the village, and saw the
ferryboat lying in the shadow of the trees and the high bank. Everything
was quiet under the blinking stars. He crept down the bank, watching
He laid himself down under the thwarts and waited, panting.
Presently the cracked bell tapped and a voice gave the order to ``cast
off.'' A minute or two later the skiff's head was standing high up,
against the boat's swell, and the voyage was begun. Tom felt happy in
the end of a long twelve or fifteen minutes the wheels stopped, and Tom
slipped overboard and swam ashore in the dusk, landing fifty yards
He flew along unfrequented alleys, and shortly found himself at his
aunt's back fence. He climbed over, approached the ``ell,'' and looked
in at the sitting-room window, for a light was burning there. There sat
door. Tom went to the door and began to softly lift the latch; then he
pressed gently and the door yielded a crack; he continued pushing
squeeze through on his knees; so he put his head through and began,
only mischEEvous. Only just giddy, and harum-scarum, you know. He warn't
any more responsible than a colt. HE never meant any harm, and he was
every kind of mischief, but he was just as unselfish and kind as he
could be -- and laws bless me, to think I went and whipped him for
taking that cream, never once recollecting that I throwed it out myself
because it was sour, and I never to see him again in this world, never,
never, never, poor abused boy!'' And Mrs. Harper sobbed as if her heart
``SID!'' Tom felt the glare of the old lady's eye, though he could not
care of HIM -- never you trouble YOURself, sir! Oh, Mrs. Harper, I don't
``The Lord giveth and the Lord hath taken away -- Blessed be the name of
Joe busted a firecracker right under my nose and I knocked him
exactly how you feel. No longer ago than yesterday noon, my Tom took and
than anybody else. He could hear Mary crying, and putting in a kindly
himself than ever before. Still, he was sufficiently touched by his
strongly to his nature, too, but he resisted and lay still.
conjectured at first that the boys had got drowned while taking a swim;
then the small raft had been missed; next, certain boys said the missing
lads had promised that the village should ``hear something'' soon; the
presently; but toward noon the raft had been found, lodged against the
Missouri shore some five or six miles below the village -- and then hope
perished; they must be drowned, else hunger would have driven them home
bodies had been a fruitless effort merely because the drowning must have
otherwise have escaped to shore. This was Wednesday night. If the bodies
continued missing until Sunday, all hope would be given over, and the
funerals would be preached on that morning. Tom shuddered.
Mrs. Harper gave a sobbing good-night and turned to go. Then with a
mutual impulse the two bereaved women flung themselves into each other's
Aunt Polly knelt down and prayed for Tom so touchingly, so appealingly,
that he was weltering in tears again, long before she was through.
broken-hearted ejaculations from time to time, tossing unrestfully, and
turning over. But at last she was still, only moaning a little in her
candle. But something occurred to him, and he lingered considering. His
hastily in his pocket. Then he bent over and kissed the faded lips, and
straightway made his stealthy exit, latching the door behind him.
He threaded his way back to the ferry landing, found nobody at large
there, and walked boldly on board the boat, for he knew she was
tenantless except that there was a watchman, who always turned in and
slept like a graven image. He untied the skiff at the stern, slipped
into it, and was soon rowing cautiously upstream. When he had pulled a
mile above the village, he started quartering across and bent himself
stoutly to his work. He hit the landing on the other side neatly, for
skiff, arguing that it might be considered a ship and therefore
made for it and that might end in revelations. So he stepped ashore and
awake, and then started warily down the home-stretch. The night was far
spent. It was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the
island bar. He rested again until the sun was well up and gilding the
great river with its splendor, and then he plunged into the stream. A
little later he paused, dripping, upon the threshold of the camp, and
knows that would be a disgrace to a pirate, and Tom's too proud for that
sort of thing. He's up to something or other. Now I wonder what?''
``Which he is!'' exclaimed Tom, with fine dramatic effect, stepping
A sumptuous breakfast of bacon and fish was shortly provided, and as the
They were a vain and boastful company of heroes when the tale was done.
Then Tom hid himself away in a shady nook to sleep till noon, and the
other pirates got ready to fish and explore.
AFTER dinner all the gang turned out to hunt for turtle eggs on the bar.
They went about poking sticks into the sand, and when they found a soft
place they went down on their knees and dug with their hands. Sometimes
they would take fifty or sixty eggs out of one hole. They were perfectly
round white things a trifle smaller than an English walnut. They had a
famous fried-egg feast that night, and another on Friday morning.
After breakfast they went whooping and prancing out on the bar, and
chased each other round and round, shedding clothes as they went, until
water of the bar, against the stiff current, which latter tripped their
legs from under them from time to time and greatly increased the fun.
And now and then they stooped in a group and splashed water in each
other's faces with their palms, gradually approaching each other, with
averted faces to avoid the strangling sprays, and finally gripping and
struggling till the best man ducked his neighbor, and then they all went
under in a tangle of white legs and arms and came up blowing,
sputtering, laughing, and gasping for breath at one and the same time.
When they were well exhausted, they would run out and sprawl on the dry,
hot sand, and lie there and cover themselves up with it, and by and by
break for the water again and go through the original performance once
more. Finally it occurred to them that their naked skin represented
and had a circus -- with three clowns in it, for none would yield this
Next they got their marbles and played ``knucks'' and ``ring-taw'' and
``keeps'' till that amusement grew stale. Then Joe and Huck had another
swim, but Tom would not venture, because he found that in kicking off
his trousers he had kicked his string of rattlesnake rattles off his
ankle, and he wondered how he had escaped cramp so long without the
protection of this mysterious charm. He did not venture again until he
had found it, and by that time the other boys were tired and ready to
rest. They gradually wandered apart, dropped into the ``dumps,'' and
drowsing in the sun. Tom found himself writing ``BECKY'' in the sand
his weakness. But he wrote it again, nevertheless; he could not help it.
driving the other boys together and joining them.
But Joe's spirits had gone down almost beyond resurrection. He was so
homesick that he could hardly endure the misery of it. The tears lay
but tried hard not to show it. He had a secret which he was not ready to
tell, yet, but if this mutinous depression was not broken up soon, he
would have to bring it out. He said, with a great show of cheerfulness:
But it roused only faint enthusiasm, which faded out, with no reply. Tom
discouraging work. Joe sat poking up the sand with a stick and looking
``But, Joe, there ain't such another swimming-place anywhere.''
``I'll never speak to you again as long as I live,'' said Joe, rising.
``There now!'' And he moved moodily away and began to dress himself.
But Tom was uneasy, nevertheless, and was alarmed to see Joe go sullenly
Joe's preparations so wistfully, and keeping up such an ominous silence.
Presently, without a parting word, Joe began to wade off toward the
Illinois shore. Tom's heart began to sink. He glanced at Huck. Huck
``I want to go, too, Tom. It was getting so lonesome anyway, and now
Huck started sorrowfully away, and Tom stood looking after him, with a
strong desire tugging at his heart to yield his pride and go along too.
He hoped the boys would stop, but they still waded slowly on. It
suddenly dawned on Tom that it was become very lonely and still. He made
one final struggle with his pride, and then darted after his comrades,
They presently stopped and turned around. When he got to where they
were, he began unfolding his secret, and they listened moodily till at
would keep them with him any very great length of time, and so he had
The lads came gayly back and went at their sports again with a will,
chattering all the time about Tom's stupendous plan and admiring the
genius of it. After a dainty egg and fish dinner, Tom said he wanted to
learn to smoke, now. Joe caught at the idea and said he would like to
try, too. So Huck made pipes and filled them. These novices had never
smoked anything before but cigars made of grape-vine, and they ``bit''
the tongue, and were not considered manly anyway.
Now they stretched themselves out on their elbows and began to puff,
charily, and with slender confidence. The smoke had an unpleasant taste,
``Why, many a time I've looked at people smoking, and thought well I
the slaughter-house. Don't you remember, Huck? Bob Tanner was there, and
Johnny Miller, and Jeff Thatcher, when I said it. Don't you remember,
``I bleeve I could smoke this pipe all day,'' said Joe. ``I don't feel
``I bet he would. And Johnny Miller -- I wish could see Johnny Miller
``Oh, don't I!'' said Joe. ``Why, I bet you Johnny Miller couldn't any
So the talk ran on. But presently it began to flag a trifle, and grow
disjointed. The silences widened; the expectoration marvellously
increased. Every pore inside the boys' cheeks became a spouting
fountain; they could scarcely bail out the cellars under their tongues
fast enough to prevent an inundation; little overflowings down their
throats occurred in spite of all they could do, and sudden retchings
followed every time. Both boys were looking very pale and miserable,
fountains were going furiously and both pumps bailing with might and
``I've lost my knife. I reckon I better go and find it.''
So Huck sat down again, and waited an hour. Then he found it lonesome,
About midnight Joe awoke, and called the boys. There was a brooding
huddled themselves together and sought the friendly companionship of the
stifling. They sat still, intent and waiting. The solemn hush continued.
Beyond the light of the fire everything was swallowed up in the
blackness of darkness. Presently there came a quivering glow that
vaguely revealed the foliage for a moment and then vanished. By and by
another came, a little stronger. Then another. Then a faint moan came
sighing through the branches of the forest and the boys felt a fleeting
breath upon their cheeks, and shuddered with the fancy that the Spirit
of the Night had gone by. There was a pause. Now a weird flash turned
night into day and showed every little grass-blade, separate and
distinct, that grew about their feet. And it showed three white,
startled faces, too. A deep peal of thunder went rolling and tumbling
down the heavens and lost itself in sullen rumblings in the distance. A
sweep of chilly air passed by, rustling all the leaves and snowing the
flaky ashes broadcast about the fire. Another fierce glare lit up the
forest and an instant crash followed that seemed to rend the tree-tops
right over the boys' heads. They clung together in terror, in the thick
gloom that followed. A few big rain-drops fell pattering upon the
They sprang away, stumbling over roots and among vines in the dark, no
trees, making everything sing as it went. One blinding flash after
another came, and peal on peal of deafening thunder. And now a drenching
rain poured down and the rising hurricane drove it in sheets along the
ground. The boys cried out to each other, but the roaring wind and the
booming thunder-blasts drowned their voices utterly. However, one by one
they straggled in at last and took shelter under the tent, cold, scared,
and streaming with water; but to have company in misery seemed something
others' hands and fled, with many tumblings and bruises, to the shelter
of a great oak that stood upon the river-bank. Now the battle was at its
highest. Under the ceaseless conflagration of lightning that flamed in
the skies, everything below stood out in clean-cut and shadowless
driving spray of spume-flakes, the dim outlines of the high bluffs on
the other side, glimpsed through the drifting cloud-rack and the
slanting veil of rain. Every little while some giant tree yielded the
fight and fell crashing through the younger growth; and the unflagging
thunder-peals came now in ear-splitting explosive bursts, keen and
sharp, and unspeakably appalling. The storm culminated in one matchless
effort that seemed likely to tear the island to pieces, burn it up,
drown it to the tree-tops, blow it away, and deafen every creature in
But at last the battle was done, and the forces retired with weaker and
weaker threatenings and grumblings, and peace resumed her sway. The boys
their beds, was a ruin, now, blasted by the lightnings, and they were
but heedless lads, like their generation, and had made no provision
and chilled. They were eloquent in their distress; but they presently
been built against (where it curved upward and separated itself from the
ground), that a handbreadth or so of it had escaped wetting; so they
patiently wrought until, with shreds and bark gathered from the under
sides of sheltered logs, they coaxed the fire to burn again. Then they
piled on great dead boughs till they had a roaring furnace, and were
glad-hearted once more. They dried their boiled ham and had a feast, and
midnight adventure until morning, for there was not a dry spot to sleep
scorched out by and by, and drearily set about getting breakfast. After
the meal they felt rusty, and stiff-jointed, and a little home-sick once
he could. But they cared nothing for marbles, or circus, or swimming, or
anything. He reminded them of the imposing secret, and raised a ray of
cheer. While it lasted, he got them interested in a new device. This was
to knock off being pirates, for a while, and be Indians for a change.
stripped, and striped from head to heel with black mud, like so many
zebras -- all of them chiefs, of course -- and then they went tearing
through the woods to attack an English settlement.
By and by they separated into three hostile tribes, and darted upon each
other from ambush with dreadful war-whoops, and killed and scalped each
other by thousands. It was a gory day. Consequently it was an extremely
They assembled in camp toward supper-time, hungry and happy; but now a
difficulty arose -- hostile Indians could not break the bread of
hospitality together without first making peace, and this was a simple
impossibility without smoking a pipe of peace. There was no other
they had remained pirates. However, there was no other way; so with such
show of cheerfulness as they could muster they called for the pipe and
took their whiff as it passed, in due form.
gained something; they found that they could now smoke a little without
with right fair success, and so they spent a jubilant evening. They were
prouder and happier in their new acquirement than they would have been
smoke and chatter and brag, since we have no further use for them at
BUT there was no hilarity in the little town that same tranquil Saturday
afternoon. The Harpers, and Aunt Polly's family, were being put into
mourning, with great grief and many tears. An unusual quiet possessed
the village, although it was ordinarily quiet enough, in all conscience.
The villagers conducted their concerns with an absent air, and talked
little; but they sighed often. The Saturday holiday seemed a burden to
the children. They had no heart in their sports, and gradually gave them
In the afternoon Becky Thatcher found herself moping about the deserted
schoolhouse yard, and feeling very melancholy. But she found nothing
``Oh, if I only had a brass andiron-knob again! But I haven't got
-- I wouldn't say it for the whole world. But he's gone now; I'll never,
This thought broke her down, and she wandered away, with tears rolling
down her cheeks. Then quite a group of boys and girls -- playmates of
Tom's and Joe's -- came by, and stood looking over the paling fence and
talking in reverent tones of how Tom did so-and-so the last time they
awful prophecy, as they could easily see now!) -- and each speaker
pointed out the exact spot where the lost lads stood at the time, and
awful, you know -- and I never thought what it meant, of course, but I
Then there was a dispute about who saw the dead boys last in life, and
many claimed that dismal distinction, and offered evidences, more or
the lucky parties took upon themselves a sort of sacred importance, and
other grandeur to offer, said with tolerably manifest pride in the
still recalling memories of the lost heroes, in awed voices.
began to toll, instead of ringing in the usual way. It was a very still
Sabbath, and the mournful sound seemed in keeping with the musing hush
that lay upon nature. The villagers began to gather, loitering a moment
in the vestibule to converse in whispers about the sad event. But there
was no whispering in the house; only the funereal rustling of dresses as
the women gathered to their seats disturbed the silence there. None
could remember when the little church had been so full before. There was
finally a waiting pause, an expectant dumbness, and then Aunt Polly
entered, followed by Sid and Mary, and they by the Harper family, all in
deep black, and the whole congregation, the old minister as well, rose
reverently and stood until the mourners were seated in the front pew.
There was another communing silence, broken at intervals by muffled
sobs, and then the minister spread his hands abroad and prayed. A moving
every soul there, thinking he recognized these pictures, felt a pang in
before, and had as persistently seen only faults and flaws in the poor
boys. The minister related many a touching incident in the lives of the
departed, too, which illustrated their sweet, generous natures, and the
people could easily see, now, how noble and beautiful those episodes
seemed rank rascalities, well deserving of the cowhide. The congregation
became more and more moved, as the pathetic tale went on, till at last
the whole company broke down and joined the weeping mourners in a chorus
of anguished sobs, the preacher himself giving way to his feelings, and
There was a rustle in the gallery, which nobody noticed; a moment later
the church door creaked; the minister raised his streaming eyes above
his handkerchief, and stood transfixed! First one and then another pair
of eyes followed the minister's, and then almost with one impulse the
congregation rose and stared while the three dead boys came marching up
listening to their own funeral sermon!
Aunt Polly, Mary, and the Harpers threw themselves upon their restored
ones, smothered them with kisses and poured out thanksgivings, while
poor Huck stood abashed and uncomfortable, not knowing exactly what to
do or where to hide from so many unwelcoming eyes. He wavered, and
started to slink away, but Tom seized him and said:
``And so they shall. I'm glad to see him, poor motherless thing!'' And
the loving attentions Aunt Polly lavished upon him were the one thing
capable of making him more uncomfortable than he was before.
And they did. Old Hundred swelled up with a triumphant burst, and while
it shook the rafters Tom Sawyer the Pirate looked around upon the
envying juveniles about him and confessed in his heart that this was the
willing to be made ridiculous again to hear Old Hundred sung like that
Tom got more cuffs and kisses that day -- according to Aunt Polly's
varying moods -- than he had earned before in a year; and he hardly knew
which expressed the most gratefulness to God and affection for himself.
THAT was Tom's great secret -- the scheme to return home with his
brother pirates and attend their own funerals. They had paddled over to
the Missouri shore on a log, at dusk on Saturday, landing five or six
miles below the village; they had slept in the woods at the edge of the
town till nearly daylight, and had then crept through back lanes and
alleys and finished their sleep in the gallery of the church among a
At breakfast, Monday morning, Aunt Polly and Mary were very loving to
Tom, and very attentive to his wants. There was an unusual amount of
cared enough to THINK of it, even if you didn't DO it.''
giddy way -- he is always in such a rush that he never thinks of
``More's the pity. Sid would have thought. And Sid would have come and
dreamt about you, anyway. That's something, ain't it?''
``Why, Wednesday night I dreamt that you was sitting over there by the
``Well, so we did. So we always do. I'm glad your dreams could take even
Tom pressed his fingers on his forehead an anxious minute, and then
days! Don't tell ME there ain't anything in dreams, any more. Sereny
Harper shall know of this before I'm an hour older. I'd like to see her
get around THIS with her rubbage 'bout superstition. Go on, Tom!''
she wished she hadn't whipped him for taking cream when she'd throwed it
``He said -- I THINK he said he hoped I was better off where I was gone
``I lay I did! There must 'a' been an angel there. There WAS an angel
``And Mrs. Harper told about Joe scaring her with a firecracker, and you
us, and 'bout having the funeral Sunday, and then you and old Miss
Harper hugged and cried, and she went.''
these very tracks. Tom, you couldn't told it more like if you'd 'a' seen
``Then I thought you prayed for me -- and I could see you and hear every
wrote on a piece of sycamore bark, 'We ain't dead -- we are only off
being pirates,' and put it on the table by the candle; and then you
looked so good, laying there asleep, that I thought I went and leaned
was awake. Here's a big Milum apple I've been saving for you, Tom, if
you was ever found again -- now go 'long to school. I'm thankful to the
goodness knows I'm unworthy of it, but if only the worthy ones got His
few enough would smile here or ever enter into His rest when the long
judgment than to utter the thought that was in his mind as he left the
public eye was on him. And indeed it was; he tried not to seem to see
the looks or hear the remarks as he passed along, but they were food and
at the head of a procession or the elephant leading a menagerie into
given anything to have that swarthy suntanned skin of his, and his
glittering notoriety; and Tom would not have parted with either for a
such eloquent admiration from their eyes, that the two heroes were not
adventures to hungry listeners -- but they only began; it was not a
thing likely to have an end, with imaginations like theirs to furnish
material. And finally, when they got out their pipes and went serenely
Tom decided that he could be independent of Becky Thatcher now. Glory
was sufficient. He would live for glory. Now that he was distinguished,
see that he could be as indifferent as some other people. Presently she
arrived. Tom pretended not to see her. He moved away and joined a group
tripping gayly back and forth with flushed face and dancing eyes,
pretending to be busy chasing schoolmates, and screaming with laughter
captures in his vicinity, and that she seemed to cast a conscious eye in
his direction at such times, too. It gratified all the vicious vanity
the more and made him the more diligent to avoid betraying that he knew
she was about. Presently she gave over skylarking, and moved
irresolutely about, sighing once or twice and glancing furtively and
wistfully toward Tom. Then she observed that now Tom was talking more
particularly to Amy Lawrence than to any one else. She felt a sharp pang
feet were treacherous, and carried her to the group instead. She said to
``Yes, every one that's friends to me -- or wants to be''; and she
glanced ever so furtively at Tom, but he talked right along to Amy
Lawrence about the terrible storm on the island, and how the lightning
tore the great sycamore tree ``all to flinders'' while he was ``standing
talking, and took Amy with him. Becky's lips trembled and the tears came
to her eyes; she hid these signs with a forced gayety and went on
everything else; she got away as soon as she could and hid herself and
pride, till the bell rang. She roused up, now, with a vindictive cast in
her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake and said she knew what SHE'D
At recess Tom continued his flirtation with Amy with jubilant
self-satisfaction. And he kept drifting about to find Becky and lacerate
her with the performance. At last he spied her, but there was a sudden
falling of his mercury. She was sitting cosily on a little bench behind
the schoolhouse looking at a picture-book with Alfred Temple -- and so
Jealousy ran red-hot through Tom's veins. He began to hate himself for
throwing away the chance Becky had offered for a reconciliation. He
called himself a fool, and all the hard names he could think of. He
wanted to cry with vexation. Amy chatted happily along, as they walked,
for her heart was singing, but Tom's tongue had lost its function. He
did not hear what Amy was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly he
could only stammer an awkward assent, which was as often misplaced as
otherwise. He kept drifting to the rear of the school-house, again and
Becky Thatcher never once suspected that he was even in the land of the
Amy's happy prattle became intolerable. Tom hinted at things he had to
attend to; things that must be done; and time was fleeting. But in vain
to get rid of her?'' At last he must be attending to those things -- and
she said artlessly that she would be ``around'' when school let out. And
``Any other boy!'' Tom thought, grating his teeth. ``Any boy in the
whole town but that Saint Louis smarty that thinks he dresses so fine
And he went through the motions of thrashing an imaginary boy --
imaginary flogging was finished to his satisfaction.
Tom fled home at noon. His conscience could not endure any more of Amy's
grateful happiness, and his jealousy could bear no more of the other
distress. Becky resumed her picture inspections with Alfred, but as the
minutes dragged along and no Tom came to suffer, her triumph began to
cloud and she lost interest; gravity and absent-mindedness followed, and
entirely miserable and wished she hadn't carried it so far. When poor
Alfred, seeing that he was losing her, he did not know how, kept
Alfred dropped alongside and was going to try to comfort her, but she
So the boy halted, wondering what he could have done -- for she had said
she would look at pictures all through the nooning -- and she walked on,
crying. Then Alfred went musing into the deserted school-house. He was
had simply made a convenience of him to vent her spite upon Tom Sawyer.
opportunity. He gratefully opened to the lesson for the afternoon and
Becky, glancing in at a window behind him at the moment, saw the act,
and moved on, without discovering herself. She started homeward, now,
intending to find Tom and tell him; Tom would be thankful and their
changed her mind. The thought of Tom's treatment of her when she was
talking about her picnic came scorching back and filled her with shame.
She resolved to let him get whipped on the damaged spelling-book's
TOM arrived at home in a dreary mood, and the first thing his aunt said
to him showed him that he had brought his sorrows to an unpromising
``Well, you've done enough. Here I go over to Sereny Harper, like an old
bad to think you could let me go to Sereny Harper and make such a fool
This was a new aspect of the thing. His smartness of the morning had
mean and shabby now. He hung his head and could not think of anything to
``Oh, child, you never think. You never think of anything but your own
Jackson's Island in the night to laugh at our troubles, and you could
think to fool me with a lie about a dream; but you couldn't ever think
``It was to tell you not to be uneasy about us, because we hadn't got
all full of the idea of our coming and hiding in the church, and I
couldn't somehow bear to spoil it. So I just put the bark back in my
The hard lines in his aunt's face relaxed and a sudden tenderness dawned
``Because I loved you so, and you laid there moaning and I was so
The words sounded like truth. The old lady could not hide a tremor in
jacket which Tom had gone pirating in. Then she stopped, with it in her
She put the jacket away, and stood by musing a minute. Twice she put out
her hand to take the garment again, and twice she refrained. Once more
she sought the jacket pocket. A moment later she was reading Tom's piece
of bark through flowing tears and saying: ``I could forgive the boy,
THERE was something about Aunt Polly's manner, when she kissed Tom, that
swept away his low spirits and made him light-hearted and happy again.
He started to school and had the luck of coming upon Becky Thatcher at
the head of Meadow Lane. His mood always determined his manner. Without
``I acted mighty mean to-day, Becky, and I'm so sorry. I won't ever,
The girl stopped and looked him scornfully in the face:
She tossed her head and passed on. Tom was so stunned that he had not
even presence of mind enough to say ``Who cares, Miss Smarty?'' until
a fine rage, nevertheless. He moped into the schoolyard wishing she were
a boy, and imagining how he would trounce her if she were. He presently
one in return, and the angry breach was complete. It seemed to Becky, in
spelling-book. If she had had any lingering notion of exposing Alfred
Temple, Tom's offensive fling had driven it entirely away.
The master, Mr. Dobbins, had reached middle age with an unsatisfied
had decreed that he should be nothing higher than a village
schoolmaster. Every day he took a mysterious book out of his desk and
absorbed himself in it at times when no classes were reciting. He kept
that book under lock and key. There was not an urchin in school but was
perishing to have a glimpse of it, but the chance never came. Every boy
and girl had a theory about the nature of that book; but no two theories
were alike, and there was no way of getting at the facts in the case.
Now, as Becky was passing by the desk, which stood near the door, she
glanced around; found herself alone, and the next instant she had the
carried no information to her mind; so she began to turn the leaves. She
came at once upon a handsomely engraved and colored frontispiece -- a
human figure, stark naked. At that moment a shadow fell on the page and
Becky snatched at the book to close it, and had the hard luck to tear
the pictured page half down the middle. She thrust the volume into the
desk, turned the key, and burst out crying with shame and vexation.
``You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Tom Sawyer; you know you're going
whipped, and I never was whipped in school.''
You just wait and you'll see! Hateful, hateful, hateful!'' -- and she
flung out of the house with a new explosion of crying.
Tom stood still, rather flustered by this onslaught. Presently he said
``What a curious kind of a fool a girl is! Never been licked in school!
thin-skinned and chicken-hearted. Well, of course I ain't going to tell
old Dobbins on this little fool, because there's other ways of getting
a kind of a tight place for Becky Thatcher, because there ain't any way
out of it.'' Tom conned the thing a moment longer, and then added: ``All
Tom joined the mob of skylarking scholars outside. In a few moments the
master arrived and school ``took in.'' Tom did not feel a strong
interest in his studies. Every time he stole a glance at the girls' side
of the room Becky's face troubled him. Considering all things, he did
could get up no exultation that was really worthy the name. Presently
lethargy of distress and showed good interest in the proceedings. She
did not expect that Tom could get out of his trouble by denying that he
spilt the ink on the book himself; and she was right. The denial only
was not certain. When the worst came to the worst, she had an impulse to
get up and tell on Alfred Temple, but she made an effort and forced
about me tearing the picture sure. I wouldn't say a word, not to save
broken-hearted, for he thought it was possible that he had unknowingly
upset the ink on the spelling-book himself, in some skylarking bout --
he had denied it for form's sake and because it was custom, and had
A whole hour drifted by, the master sat nodding in his throne, the air
was drowsy with the hum of study. By and by, Mr. Dobbins straightened
himself up, yawned, then unlocked his desk, and reached for his book,
pupils glanced up languidly, but there were two among them that watched
his movements with intent eyes. Mr. Dobbins fingered his book absently
for a while, then took it out and settled himself in his chair to read!
Tom shot a glance at Becky. He had seen a hunted and helpless rabbit
his quarrel with her. Quick -- something must be done! done in a flash,
too! But the very imminence of the emergency paralyzed his invention.
Good! -- he had an inspiration! He would run and snatch the book, spring
through the door and fly. But his resolution shook for one little
instant, and the chance was lost -- the master opened the volume. If Tom
only had the wasted opportunity back again! Too late. There was no help
Every eye sank under his gaze. There was that in it which smote even the
innocent with fear. There was silence while one might count ten -- the
master was gathering his wrath. Then he spoke: ``Who tore this book?''
There was not a sound. One could have heard a pin drop. The stillness
continued; the master searched face after face for signs of guilt.
Another denial. Tom's uneasiness grew more and more intense under the
slow torture of these proceedings. The master scanned the ranks of boys
Another negative. The next girl was Becky Thatcher. Tom was trembling
A thought shot like lightning through Tom's brain. He sprang to his feet
The school stared in perplexity at this incredible folly. Tom stood a
moment, to gather his dismembered faculties; and when he stepped forward
to go to his punishment the surprise, the gratitude, the adoration that
shone upon him out of poor Becky's eyes seemed pay enough for a hundred
floggings. Inspired by the splendor of his own act, he took without an
outcry the most merciless flaying that even Mr. Dobbins had ever
knew who would wait for him outside till his captivity was done, and not
Tom went to bed that night planning vengeance against Alfred Temple; for
with shame and repentance Becky had told him all, not forgetting her own
treachery; but even the longing for vengeance had to give way, soon, to
now -- at least among the smaller pupils. Only the biggest boys, and
young ladies of eighteen and twenty, escaped lashing. Mr. Dobbins'
lashings were very vigorous ones, too; for although he carried, under
seemed to take a vindictive pleasure in punishing the least
shortcomings. The consequence was, that the smaller boys spent their
days in terror and suffering and their nights in plotting revenge. They
all the time. The retribution that followed every vengeful success was
badly worsted. At last they conspired together and hit upon a plan that
promised a dazzling victory. They swore in the sign-painter's boy, told
him the scheme, and asked his help. He had his own reasons for being
delighted, for the master boarded in his father's family and had given
the boy ample cause to hate him. The master's wife would go on a visit
to the country in a few days, and there would be nothing to interfere
with the plan; the master always prepared himself for great occasions by
getting pretty well fuddled, and the sign-painter's boy said that when
the dominie had reached the proper condition on Examination Evening he
would ``manage the thing'' while he napped in his chair; then he would
In the fulness of time the interesting occasion arrived. At eight in the
evening the schoolhouse was brilliantly lighted, and adorned with
wreaths and festoons of foliage and flowers. The master sat throned in
his great chair upon a raised platform, with his blackboard behind him.
He was looking tolerably mellow. Three rows of benches on each side and
six rows in front of him were occupied by the dignitaries of the town
citizens, was a spacious temporary platform upon which were seated the
small boys, washed and dressed to an intolerable state of discomfort;
rows of gawky big boys; snowbanks of girls and young ladies clad in lawn
grandmothers' ancient trinkets, their bits of pink and blue ribbon and
The exercises began. A very little boy stood up and sheepishly recited,
``You'd scarce expect one of my age to speak in public on the stage,''
etc. -- accompanying himself with the painfully exact and spasmodic
gestures which a machine might have used -- supposing the machine to be
and got a fine round of applause when he made his manufactured bow and
performed a compassion-inspiring curtsy, got her meed of applause, and
Tom Sawyer stepped forward with conceited confidence and soared into the
speech, with fine fury and frantic gesticulation, and broke down in the
middle of it. A ghastly stage-fright seized him, his legs quaked under
house but he had the house's silence, too, which was even worse than its
sympathy. The master frowned, and this completed the disaster. Tom
``The Boy Stood on the Burning Deck'' followed; also ``The Assyrian Came
Down,'' and other declamatory gems. Then there were reading exercises,
and a spelling fight. The meagre Latin class recited with honor. The
prime feature of the evening was in order, now -- original
``compositions'' by the young ladies. Each in her turn stepped forward
to the edge of the platform, cleared her throat, held up her manuscript
(tied with dainty ribbon), and proceeded to read, with labored attention
their grandmothers, and doubtless all their ancestors in the female line
Culture''; ``Forms of Political Government Compared and Contrasted'';
A prevalent feature in these compositions was a nursed and petted
melancholy; another was a wasteful and opulent gush of ``fine
language''; another was a tendency to lug in by the ears particularly
prized words and phrases until they were worn entirely out; and a
peculiarity that conspicuously marked and marred them was the inveterate
and intolerable sermon that wagged its crippled tail at the end of each
brain-racking effort was made to squirm it into some aspect or other
that the moral and religious mind could contemplate with edification.
The glaring insincerity of these sermons was not sufficient to compass
the banishment of the fashion from the schools, and it is not sufficient
to-day; it never will be sufficient while the world stands, perhaps.
There is no school in all our land where the young ladies do not feel
obliged to close their compositions with a sermon; and you will find
that the sermon of the most frivolous and the least religious girl in
the school is always the longest and the most relentlessly pious. But
enough of this. Homely truth is unpalatable.
read was one entitled ``Is this, then, Life?'' Perhaps the reader can
``In the common walks of life, with what delightful emotions does the
youthful mind look forward to some anticipated scene of festivity!
Imagination is busy sketching rose-tinted pictures of joy. In fancy, the
voluptuous votary of fashion sees herself amid the festive throng, 'the
observed of all observers.' Her graceful form, arrayed in snowy robes,
is whirling through the mazes of the joyous dance; her eye is brightest,
``In such delicious fancies time quickly glides by, and the welcome hour
such bright dreams. How fairy-like does everything appear to her
enchanted vision! Each new scene is more charming than the last. But
after a while she finds that beneath this goodly exterior, all is
vanity, the flattery which once charmed her soul, now grates harshly
and imbittered heart, she turns away with the conviction that earthly
pleasures cannot satisfy the longings of the soul!''
time during the reading, accompanied by whispered ejaculations of ``How
sweet!'' ``How eloquent!'' ``So true!'' etc., and after the thing had
closed with a peculiarly afflicting sermon the applause was
Then arose a slim, melancholy girl, whose face had the ``interesting''
paleness that comes of pills and indigestion, and read a ``poem.'' Two
thee now! Sad, yes, sad thoughts of thee my heart doth swell, And
burning recollections throng my brow! For I have wandered through thy
flowery woods; Have roamed and read near Tallapoosa's stream; Have
listened to Tallassee's warring floods, And wooed on Coosa's side
``Yet shame I not to bear an o'er-full heart, Nor blush to turn behind
strangers left I yield these sighs. Welcome and home were mine within
this State, Whose vales I leave -- whose spires fade fast from me And
Next appeared a dark-complexioned, black-eyed, black-haired young lady,
who paused an impressive moment, assumed a tragic expression, and began
``Dark and tempestuous was night. Around the throne on high not a single
star quivered; but the deep intonations of the heavy thunder constantly
vibrated upon the ear; whilst the terrific lightning revelled in angry
mood through the cloudy chambers of heaven, seeming to scorn the power
exerted over its terror by the illustrious Franklin! Even the boisterous
winds unanimously came forth from their mystic homes, and blustered
about as if to enhance by their aid the wildness of the scene.''
``'My dearest friend, my counsellor, my comforter and guide -- My joy in
grief, my second bliss in joy,' came to my side. She moved like one of
those bright beings pictured in the sunny walks of fancy's Eden by the
romantic and young, a queen of beauty unadorned save by her own
transcendent loveliness. So soft was her step, it failed to make even a
sound, and but for the magical thrill imparted by her genial touch, as
other unobtrusive beauties, she would have glided away un-perceived --
unsought. A strange sadness rested upon her features, like icy tears
upon the robe of December, as she pointed to the contending elements
without, and bade me contemplate the two beings presented.''
This nightmare occupied some ten pages of manuscript and wound up with a
first prize. This composition was considered to be the very finest
effort of the evening. The mayor of the village, in delivering the prize
far the most ``eloquent'' thing he had ever listened to, and that Daniel
It may be remarked, in passing, that the number of compositions in which
Now the master, mellow almost to the verge of geniality, put his chair
aside, turned his back to the audience, and began to draw a map of
America on the blackboard, to exercise the geography class upon. But he
rippled over the house. He knew what the matter was, and set himself to
right it. He sponged out lines and remade them; but he only distorted
entire attention upon his work, now, as if determined not to be put down
he was succeeding, and yet the tittering continued; it even manifestly
suspended around the haunches by a string; she had a rag tied about her
curved upward and clawed at the string, she swung downward and clawed at
the intangible air. The tittering rose higher and higher -- the cat was
within six inches of the absorbed teacher's head -- down, down, a little
lower, and she grabbed his wig with her desperate claws, clung to it,
That broke up the meeting. The boys were avenged. Vacation had come.
NOTE:-- The pretended ``compositions'' quoted in this chapter are taken
without alteration from a volume entitled ``Prose and Poetry, by a
schoolgirl pattern, and hence are much happier than any mere imitations
TOM joined the new order of Cadets of Temperance, being attracted by the
showy character of their ``regalia.'' He promised to abstain from
smoking, chewing, and profanity as long as he remained a member. Now he
found out a new thing -- namely, that to promise not to do a thing is
thing. Tom soon found himself tormented with a desire to drink and
swear; the desire grew to be so intense that nothing but the hope of a
chance to display himself in his red sash kept him from withdrawing from
the order. Fourth of July was coming; but he soon gave that up -- gave
it up before he had worn his shackles over forty-eight hours -- and
apparently on his deathbed and would have a big public funeral, since he
was so high an official. During three days Tom was deeply concerned
about the Judge's condition and hungry for news of it. Sometimes his
discouraging way of fluctuating. At last he was pronounced upon the mend
-- and then convalescent. Tom was disgusted; and felt a sense of injury,
suffered a relapse and died. Tom resolved that he would never trust a
The funeral was a fine thing. The Cadets paraded in a style calculated
there was something in that. He could drink and swear, now -- but found
Tom presently wondered to find that his coveted vacation was beginning
He attempted a diary -- but nothing happened during three days, and so
The first of all the negro minstrel shows came to town, and made a
sensation. Tom and Joe Harper got up a band of performers and were happy
Even the Glorious Fourth was in some sense a failure, for it rained
hard, there was no procession in consequence, and the greatest man in
the world (as Tom supposed), Mr. Benton, an actual United States
Senator, proved an overwhelming disappointment -- for he was not
A circus came. The boys played circus for three days afterward in tents
made of rag carpeting -- admission, three pins for boys, two for girls
A phrenologist and a mesmerizer came -- and went again and left the
village duller and drearier than ever.
delightful that they only made the aching voids between ache the harder.
parents during vacation -- so there was no bright side to life anywhere.
The dreadful secret of the murder was a chronic misery. It was a very
During two long weeks Tom lay a prisoner, dead to the world and its
happenings. He was very ill, he was interested in nothing. When he got
upon his feet at last and moved feebly down-town, a melancholy change
had come over everything and every creature. There had been a
``revival,'' and everybody had ``got religion,'' not only the adults,
but even the boys and girls. Tom went about, hoping against hope for the
sight of one blessed sinful face, but disappointment crossed him
everywhere. He found Joe Harper studying a Testament, and turned sadly
away from the depressing spectacle. He sought Ben Rogers, and found him
visiting the poor with a basket of tracts. He hunted up Jim Hollis, who
called his attention to the precious blessing of his late measles as a
warning. Every boy he encountered added another ton to his depression;
Huckleberry Finn and was received with a Scriptural quotation, his heart
broke and he crept home and to bed realizing that he alone of all the
And that night there came on a terrific storm, with driving rain, awful
claps of thunder and blinding sheets of lightning. He covered his head
with the bedclothes and waited in a horror of suspense for his doom; for
battery of artillery, but there seemed nothing incongruous about the
getting up such an expensive thunder-storm as this to knock the turf
By and by the tempest spent itself and died without accomplishing its
object. The boy's first impulse was to be grateful, and reform. His
second was to wait -- for there might not be any more storms.
spent on his back this time seemed an entire age. When he got abroad at
last he was hardly grateful that he had been spared, remembering how
lonely was his estate, how companionless and forlorn he was. He drifted
listlessly down the street and found Jim Hollis acting as judge in a
juvenile court that was trying a cat for murder, in the presence of her
victim, a bird. He found Joe Harper and Huck Finn up an alley eating a
AT last the sleepy atmosphere was stirred -- and vigorously: the murder
trial came on in the court. It became the absorbing topic of village
talk immediately. Tom could not get away from it. Every reference to the
murder sent a shudder to his heart, for his troubled conscience and
fears almost persuaded him that these remarks were put forth in his
knowing anything about the murder, but still he could not be comfortable
relief to unseal his tongue for a little while; to divide his burden of
distress with another sufferer. Moreover, he wanted to assure himself
``Why, Tom Sawyer, we wouldn't be alive two days if that got found out.
So they swore again with dread solemnities.
time. It keeps me in a sweat, constant, so's I want to hide som'ers.''
``Most always -- most always. He ain't no account; but then he hain't
ever done anything to hurt anybody. Just fishes a little, to get money
to get drunk on -- and loafs around considerable; but lord, we all do
``Well, he's mended kites for me, Huck, and knitted hooks on to my line.
twilight drew on, they found themselves hanging about the neighborhood
of the little isolated jail, perhaps with an undefined hope that
nothing happened; there seemed to be no angels or fairies interested in
and gave Potter some tobacco and matches. He was on the ground floor and
His gratitude for their gifts had always smote their consciences before
``You've been mighty good to me, boys -- better'n anybody else in this
fishin' places was, and befriend 'em what I could, and now they've all
done an awful thing -- drunk and crazy at the time -- that's the only
Right, and BEST, too, I reckon -- hope so, anyway. Well, we won't talk
comfort to see faces that's friendly when a body's in such a muck of
trouble, and there don't none come here but yourn. Good friendly faces
-- good friendly faces. Git up on one another's backs and let me touch
The next day and the day after, he hung about the court-room, drawn by
an almost irresistible impulse to go in, but forcing himself to stay
fascination always brought them back presently. Tom kept his ears open
when idlers sauntered out of the court-room, but invariably heard
distressing news -- the toils were closing more and more relentlessly
the effect that Injun Joe's evidence stood firm and unshaken, and that
sleep. All the village flocked to the court-house the next morning, for
this was to be the great day. Both sexes were about equally represented
in the packed audience. After a long wait the jury filed in and took
their places; shortly afterward, Potter, pale and haggard, timid and
hopeless, was brought in, with chains upon him, and seated where all the
curious eyes could stare at him; no less conspicuous was Injun Joe,
stolid as ever. There was another pause, and then the judge arrived and
the sheriff proclaimed the opening of the court. The usual whisperings
details and accompanying delays worked up an atmosphere of preparation
Now a witness was called who testified that he found Muff Potter washing
The prisoner raised his eyes for a moment, but dropped them again when
The next witness proved the finding of the knife near the corpse.
A third witness swore he had often seen the knife in Potter's
Counsel for Potter declined to question him. The faces of the audience
began to betray annoyance. Did this attorney mean to throw away his
Several witnesses deposed concerning Potter's guilty behavior when
brought to the scene of the murder. They were allowed to leave the stand
without being cross-questioned.
Every detail of the damaging circumstances that occurred in the
graveyard upon that morning which all present remembered so well was
brought out by credible witnesses, but none of them were cross-examined
by Potter's lawyer. The perplexity and dissatisfaction of the house
expressed itself in murmurs and provoked a reproof from the bench.
``By the oaths of citizens whose simple word is above suspicion, we have
fastened this awful crime, beyond all possibility of question, upon the
A groan escaped from poor Potter, and he put his face in his hands and
rocked his body softly to and fro, while a painful silence reigned in
the court-room. Many men were moved, and many women's compassion
testified itself in tears. Counsel for the defence rose and said:
foreshadowed our purpose to prove that our client did this fearful deed
while under the influence of a blind and irresponsible delirium produced
by drink. We have changed our mind. We shall not offer that plea.''
A puzzled amazement awoke in every face in the house, not even excepting
Potter's. Every eye fastened itself with wondering interest upon Tom as
he rose and took his place upon the stand. The boy looked wild enough,
``Thomas Sawyer, where were you on the seventeenth of June, about the
moments, however, the boy got a little of his strength back, and managed
``A little bit louder, please. Don't be afraid. You were --''
A contemptuous smile flitted across Injun Joe's face.
``Speak up -- just a trifle louder. How near were you?''
``Wait -- wait a moment. Never mind mentioning your companion's name. We
will produce him at the proper time. Did you carry anything there with
words flowed more and more easily; in a little while every sound ceased
but his own voice; every eye fixed itself upon him; with parted lips and
bated breath the audience hung upon his words, taking no note of time,
rapt in the ghastly fascinations of the tale. The strain upon pent
emotion reached its climax when the boy said:
``-- and as the doctor fetched the board around and Muff Potter fell,
Injun Joe jumped with the knife and --''
Crash! Quick as lightning the half-breed sprang for a window, tore his
magnified him. There were some that believed he would be President, yet,
of conduct is to the world's credit; therefore it is not well to find
were seasons of horror. Injun Joe infested all his dreams, and always
stir abroad after nightfall. Poor Huck was in the same state of
the night before the great day of the trial, and Huck was sore afraid
that his share in the business might leak out, yet, notwithstanding
Injun Joe's flight had saved him the suffering of testifying in court.
that? Since Tom's harassed conscience had managed to drive him to the
lawyer's house by night and wring a dread tale from lips that had been
Daily Muff Potter's gratitude made Tom glad he had spoken; but nightly
Half the time Tom was afraid Injun Joe would never be captured; the
other half he was afraid he would be. He felt sure he never could draw a
safe breath again until that man was dead and he had seen the corpse.
Rewards had been offered, the country had been scoured, but no Injun Joe
was found. One of those omniscient and awe-inspiring marvels, a
detective, came up from St. Louis, moused around, shook his head, looked
craft usually achieve. That is to say, he ``found a clew.'' But you
The slow days drifted on, and each left behind it a slightly lightened
THERE comes a time in every rightly-constructed boy's life when he has a
raging desire to go somewhere and dig for hidden treasure. This desire
failed of success. Next he sought Ben Rogers; he had gone fishing.
Presently he stumbled upon Huck Finn the Red-Handed. Huck would answer.
confidentially. Huck was willing. Huck was always willing to take a hand
in any enterprise that offered entertainment and required no capital,
sometimes on islands, sometimes in rotten chests under the end of a limb
of an old dead tree, just where the shadow falls at midnight; but mostly
``Why, robbers, of course -- who'd you reckon? Sunday-school
``So would I. But robbers don't do that way. They always hide it and
they die. Anyway, it lays there a long time and gets rusty; and by and
by somebody finds an old yellow paper that tells how to find the marks
``Hy'roglyphics -- pictures and things, you know, that don't seem to
``I don't want any marks. They always bury it under a ha'nted house or
Well, we've tried Jackson's Island a little, and we can try it again
some time; and there's the old ha'nted house up the Still-House branch,
dollars in it, all rusty and gray, or rotten chest full of di'monds.
``That's bully. Plenty bully enough for me. Just you gimme the hundred
``All right. But I bet you I ain't going to throw off on di'monds. Some
of 'em's worth twenty dollars apiece -- there ain't any, hardly, but's
three-mile tramp. They arrived hot and panting, and threw themselves
every circus that comes along. I bet I'll have a gay time.''
it out pretty quick. What you going to do with yourn, Tom?''
``Well, that's the foolishest thing you could do. Look at pap and my
``That ain't anything. The girl I'm going to marry won't fight.''
better think 'bout this awhile. I tell you you better. What's the name
right, like enough. Anyway, what's her name, Tom?''
They worked and sweated for half an hour. No result. They toiled another
``Sometimes -- not always. Not generally. I reckon we haven't got the
but still they made progress. They pegged away in silence for some time.
``Where you going to dig next, after we get this one?''
``I reckon maybe we'll tackle the old tree that's over yonder on Cardiff
``SHE take it away! Maybe she'd like to try it once. Whoever finds one
of these hid treasures, it belongs to him. It don't make any difference
``Blame it, we must be in the wrong place again. What do you think?''
interfere. I reckon maybe that's what's the trouble now.''
``Shucks! Witches ain't got no power in the daytime.''
shadow of the limb falls at midnight, and that's where you dig!''
sees these holes they'll know in a minute what's here and they'll go for
The boys were there that night, about the appointed time. They sat in
the shadow waiting. It was a lonely place, and an hour made solemn by
old traditions. Spirits whispered in the rustling leaves, ghosts lurked
in the murky nooks, the deep baying of a hound floated up out of the
distance, an owl answered with his sepulchral note. The boys were
subdued by these solemnities, and talked little. By and by they judged
that twelve had come; they marked where the shadow fell, and began to
dig. Their hopes commenced to rise. Their interest grew stronger, and
their industry kept pace with it. The hole deepened and still deepened,
but every time their hearts jumped to hear the pick strike upon
something, they only suffered a new disappointment. It was only a stone
thing's too awful, here this time of night with witches and ghosts
a-fluttering around so. I feel as if something's behind me all the time;
and I'm afeard to turn around, becuz maybe there's others in front
a-waiting for a chance. I been creeping all over, ever since I got
worse'n dead people. Dead people might talk, maybe, but they don't come
sliding around in a shroud, when you ain't noticing, and peep over your
couldn't stand such a thing as that, Tom -- nobody could.''
``Yes, but, Huck, ghosts don't travel around only at night. They won't
hender us from digging there in the daytime.''
``Well, that's mostly because they don't like to go where a man's been
murdered, anyway -- but nothing's ever been seen around that house
except in the night -- just some blue lights slipping by the windows --
``Well, where you see one of them blue lights flickering around, Tom,
you can bet there's a ghost mighty close behind it. It stands to reason.
moonlit valley below them stood the ``ha'nted'' house, utterly isolated,
chimney crumbled to ruin, the window-sashes vacant, a corner of the roof
caved in. The boys gazed awhile, half expecting to see a blue light flit
past a window; then talking in a low tone, as befitted the time and the
circumstances, they struck far off to the right, to give the haunted
for their tools. Tom was impatient to go to the haunted house; Huck was
``Blame it, a body can't be too careful, Huck. We might 'a' got into an
awful scrape, tackling such a thing on a Friday.''
``Any fool knows that. I don't reckon YOU was the first that found it
there's trouble around, you know. All we got to do is to look mighty
``Only sheriffs and bishops and rich people and kings, and such like.
So they played Robin Hood all the afternoon, now and then casting a
yearning eye down upon the haunted house and passing a remark about the
morrow's prospects and possibilities there. As the sun began to sink
into the west they took their way homeward athwart the long shadows of
the trees and soon were buried from sight in the forests of Cardiff
On Saturday, shortly after noon, the boys were at the dead tree again.
They had a smoke and a chat in the shade, and then dug a little in their
so many cases where people had given up a treasure after getting down
within six inches of it, and then somebody else had come along and
turned it up with a single thrust of a shovel. The thing failed this
time, however, so the boys shouldered their tools and went away feeling
requirements that belong to the business of treasure-hunting.
When they reached the haunted house there was something so weird and
grisly about the dead silence that reigned there under the baking sun,
and something so depressing about the loneliness and desolation of the
place, that they were afraid, for a moment, to venture in. Then they
floorless room, unplastered, an ancient fireplace, vacant windows, a
ruinous staircase; and here, there, and everywhere hung ragged and
abandoned cobwebs. They presently entered, softly, with quickened
pulses, talking in whispers, ears alert to catch the slightest sound,
and muscles tense and ready for instant retreat.
In a little while familiarity modified their fears and they gave the
place a critical and interested examination, rather admiring their own
This was something like cutting off retreat, but they got to daring each
other, and of course there could be but one result -- they threw their
tools into a corner and made the ascent. Up there were the same signs of
promise was a fraud -- there was nothing in it. Their courage was up now
knot-holes in the planking, and lay waiting, in a misery of fear.
dumb Spaniard that's been about town once or twice lately -- never saw
``T'other'' was a ragged, unkempt creature, with nothing very pleasant
whiskers; long white hair flowed from under his sombrero, and he wore
green goggles. When they came in, ``t'other'' was talking in a low
the wall, and the speaker continued his remarks. His manner became less
'Twon't ever be known that we tried, anyway, long as we didn't
``I know that. But there warn't any other place as handy after that fool
of a job. I want to quit this shanty. I wanted to yesterday, only it
playing over there on the hill right in full view.''
``Those infernal boys'' quaked again under the inspiration of this
Friday and concluded to wait a day. They wished in their hearts they had
there till you hear from me. I'll take the chances on dropping into this
I've spied around a little and think things look well for it. Then for
This was satisfactory. Both men presently fell to yawning, and Injun Joe
He curled down in the weeds and soon began to snore. His comrade stirred
him once or twice and he became quiet. Presently the watcher began to
nod; his head drooped lower and lower, both men began to snore now.
Tom urged -- Huck held back. At last Tom rose slowly and softly, and
started alone. But the first step he made wrung such a hideous creak
from the crazy floor that he sank down almost dead with fright. He never
made a second attempt. The boys lay there counting the dragging moments
Now one snore ceased. Injun Joe sat up, stared around -- smiled grimly
upon his comrade, whose head was drooping upon his knees -- stirred him
``Here! YOU'RE a watchman, ain't you! All right, though -- nothing's
``Oh, partly, partly. Nearly time for us to be moving, pard. What'll we
to take it away till we start south. Six hundred and fifty in silver's
chance at that job; accidents might happen; 'tain't in such a very good
``Good idea,'' said the comrade, who walked across the room, knelt down,
raised one of the rearward hearth-stones and took out a bag that jingled
and as much for Injun Joe, and passed the bag to the latter, who was on
his knees in the corner, now, digging with his bowie-knife.
The boys forgot all their fears, all their miseries in an instant. With
gloating eyes they watched every movement. Luck! -- the splendor of it
was beyond all imagination! Six hundred dollars was money enough to make
auspices -- there would not be any bothersome uncertainty as to where to
dig. They nudged each other every moment -- eloquent nudges and easily
understood, for they simply meant -- ``Oh, but ain't you glad NOW we're
``Half-rotten plank -- no, it's a box, I believe. Here -- bear a hand
above were as excited as themselves, and as delighted.
``We'll make quick work of this. There's an old rusty pick over amongst
looked it over critically, shook his head, muttered something to
slow years had injured it. The men contemplated the treasure awhile in
``Pard, there's thousands of dollars here,'' said Injun Joe.
``'Twas always said that Murrel's gang used to be around here one
``You don't know me. Least you don't know all about that thing. 'Tain't
robbery altogether -- it's REVENGE!'' and a wicked light flamed in his
``Yes. [Ravishing delight overhead.] NO! by the great Sachem, no!
[Profound distress overhead.] I'd nearly forgot. That pick had fresh
earth on it! [The boys were sick with terror in a moment.] What business
has a pick and a shovel here? What business with fresh earth on them?
anybody? -- seen anybody? What! bury it again and leave them to come and
see the ground disturbed? Not exactly -- not exactly. We'll take it to
``Why, of course! Might have thought of that before. You mean Number
Injun Joe got up and went about from window to window cautiously peeping
``Who could have brought those tools here? Do you reckon they can be
The boys' breath forsook them. Injun Joe put his hand on his knife,
halted a moment, undecided, and then turned toward the stairway. The
boys thought of the closet, but their strength was gone. The steps came
creaking up the stairs -- the intolerable distress of the situation woke
the stricken resolution of the lads -- they were about to spring for the
closet, when there was a crash of rotten timbers and Injun Joe landed on
get into trouble, who objects? It will be dark in fifteen minutes -- and
whoever hove those things in here caught a sight of us and took us for
ghosts or devils or something. I'll bet they're running yet.''
Joe grumbled awhile; then he agreed with his friend that what daylight
was left ought to be economized in getting things ready for leaving.
Shortly afterward they slipped out of the house in the deepening
were content to reach ground again without broken necks, and take the
absorbed in hating themselves -- hating the ill luck that made them take
the spade and the pick there. But for that, Injun Joe never would have
They resolved to keep a lookout for that Spaniard when he should come to
town spying out for chances to do his revengeful job, and follow him to
``Number Two,'' wherever that might be. Then a ghastly thought occurred
least mean nobody but Tom, since only Tom had testified.
Very, very small comfort it was to Tom to be alone in danger! Company
THE adventure of the day mightily tormented Tom's dreams that night.
Four times he had his hands on that rich treasure and four times it
wasted to nothingness in his fingers as sleep forsook him and
wakefulness brought back the hard reality of his misfortune. As he lay
in the early morning recalling the incidents of his great adventure, he
noticed that they seemed curiously subdued and far away -- somewhat as
if they had happened in another world, or in a time long gone by. Then
There was one very strong argument in favor of this idea -- namely, that
seen as much as fifty dollars in one mass before, and he was like all
speech, and that no such sums really existed in the world. He never had
supposed for a moment that so large a sum as a hundred dollars was to be
found in actual money in any one's possession. If his notions of hidden
treasure had been analyzed, they would have been found to consist of a
handful of real dimes and a bushel of vague, splendid, ungraspable
But the incidents of his adventure grew sensibly sharper and clearer
under the attrition of thinking them over, and so he presently found
himself leaning to the impression that the thing might not have been a
dream, after all. This uncertainty must be swept away. He would snatch a
hurried breakfast and go and find Huck. Huck was sitting on the gunwale
of a flatboat, listlessly dangling his feet in the water and looking
did not do it, then the adventure would be proved to have been only a
``Dream! If them stairs hadn't broke down you'd 'a' seen how much dream
it was! I've had dreams enough all night -- with that patch-eyed Spanish
``Well, that's so. Lemme think a minute. Here -- it's the number of a
2 had long been occupied by a young lawyer, and was still so occupied.
In the less ostentatious house, No. 2 was a mystery. The tavern-keeper's
young son said it was kept locked all the time, and he never saw anybody
particular reason for this state of things; had had some little
noticed that there was a light in there the night before.
into that little close alley between the tavern and the old rattle trap
maybe he'd never think anything.''
``Well, if it's pretty dark I reckon I'll track him. I dono -- I dono.
out he couldn't get his revenge, and be going right after that money.''
THAT night Tom and Huck were ready for their adventure. They hung about
the neighborhood of the tavern until after nine, one watching the alley
at a distance and the other the tavern door. Nobody entered the alley or
left it; nobody resembling the Spaniard entered or left the tavern door.
understanding that if a considerable degree of darkness came on, Huck
But the night remained clear, and Huck closed his watch and retired to
night promised better. Tom slipped out in good season with his aunt's
old tin lantern, and a large towel to blindfold it with. He hid the
lantern in Huck's sugar hogshead and the watch began. An hour before
midnight the tavern closed up and its lights (the only ones thereabouts)
alley. Everything was auspicious. The blackness of darkness reigned, the
perfect stillness was interrupted only by occasional mutterings of
Tom got his lantern, lit it in the hogshead, wrapped it closely in the
towel, and the two adventurers crept in the gloom toward the tavern.
Huck stood sentry and Tom felt his way into the alley. Then there was a
season of waiting anxiety that weighed upon Huck's spirits like a
mountain. He began to wish he could see a flash from the lantern -- it
fainted; maybe he was dead; maybe his heart had burst under terror and
excitement. In his uneasiness Huck found himself drawing closer and
closer to the alley; fearing all sorts of dreadful things, and
momentarily expecting some catastrophe to happen that would take away
his breath. There was not much to take away, for he seemed only able to
inhale it by thimblefuls, and his heart would soon wear itself out, the
way it was beating. Suddenly there was a flash of light and Tom came
He needn't have repeated it; once was enough; Huck was making thirty or
forty miles an hour before the repetition was uttered. The boys never
but they seemed to make such a power of racket that I couldn't hardly
get my breath I was so scared. They wouldn't turn in the lock, either.
Well, without noticing what I was doing, I took hold of the knob, and
open comes the door! It warn't locked! I hopped in, and shook off the
``Yes! He was lying there, sound asleep on the floor, with his old patch
``No, never budged. Drunk, I reckon. I just grabbed that towel and
the cross. I didn't see anything but a bottle and a tin cup on the floor
by Injun Joe; yes, I saw two barrels and lots more bottles in the room.
``Why, it's ha'nted with whiskey! Maybe ALL the Temperance Taverns have
``Well, I reckon maybe that's so. Who'd 'a' thought such a thing? But
``And I reckon not, Huck. Only one bottle along-side of Injun Joe ain't
enough. If there'd been three, he'd be drunk enough and I'd do it.''
There was a long pause for reflection, and then Tom said:
Joe's not in there. It's too scary. Now, if we watch every night, we'll
``Well, I'm agreed. I'll watch the whole night long, and I'll do it
block and maow -- and if I'm asleep, you throw some gravel at the window
daylight in a couple of hours. You go back and watch that long, will
``I said I would, Tom, and I will. I'll ha'nt that tavern every night
for a year! I'll sleep all day and I'll stand watch all night.''
``In Ben Rogers' hayloft. He lets me, and so does his pap's nigger man,
Uncle Jake. I tote water for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and any
time I ask him he gives me a little something to eat if he can spare it.
That's a mighty good nigger, Tom. He likes me, becuz I don't ever act as
if I was above him. Sometime I've set right down and eat WITH him. But
you needn't tell that. A body's got to do things when he's awful hungry
come bothering around. Any time you see something's up, in the night,
THE first thing Tom heard on Friday morning was a glad piece of news --
Judge Thatcher's family had come back to town the night before. Both
Injun Joe and the treasure sunk into secondary importance for a moment,
and Becky took the chief place in the boy's interest. He saw her and
with a crowd of their school-mates. The day was completed and crowned in
a peculiarly satisfactory way: Becky teased her mother to appoint the
consented. The child's delight was boundless; and Tom's not more
moderate. The invitations were sent out before sunset, and straightway
the young folks of the village were thrown into a fever of preparation
and pleasurable anticipation. Tom's excitement enabled him to keep awake
until a pretty late hour, and he had good hopes of hearing Huck's
``maow,'' and of having his treasure to astonish Becky and the
Morning came, eventually, and by ten or eleven o'clock a giddy and
rollicking company were gathered at Judge Thatcher's, and everything was
picnics with their presence. The children were considered safe enough
under the wings of a few young ladies of eighteen and a few young
chartered for the occasion; presently the gay throng filed up the main
street laden with provision-baskets. Sid was sick and had to miss the
have ice-cream! She has it most every day -- dead loads of it. And
Then Becky reflected a moment and said:
The Widow Douglas' splendid hospitality was a tempting bait. It and
nothing anybody about the night's programme. Presently it occurred to
Tom that maybe Huck might come this very night and give the signal. The
could not bear to give up the fun at Widow Douglas'. And why should he
evening outweighed the uncertain treasure; and, boy-like, he determined
to yield to the stronger inclination and not allow himself to think of
Three miles below town the ferryboat stopped at the mouth of a woody
hollow and tied up. The crowd swarmed ashore and soon the forest
distances and craggy heights echoed far and near with shoutings and
laughter. All the different ways of getting hot and tired were gone
with responsible appetites, and then the destruction of the good things
began. After the feast there was a refreshing season of rest and chat in
Everybody was. Bundles of candles were procured, and straightway there
hillside -- an opening shaped like a letter A. Its massive oaken door
stood unbarred. Within was a small chamber, chilly as an ice-house, and
walled by Nature with solid limestone that was dewy with a cold sweat.
It was romantic and mysterious to stand here in the deep gloom and look
out upon the green valley shining in the sun. But the impressiveness of
the situation quickly wore off, and the romping began again. The moment
a candle was lighted there was a general rush upon the owner of it; a
struggle and a gallant defence followed, but the candle was soon knocked
down or blown out, and then there was a glad clamor of laughter and a
new chase. But all things have an end. By-and-by the procession went
filing down the steep descent of the main avenue, the flickering rank of
lights dimly revealing the lofty walls of rock almost to their point of
junction sixty feet overhead. This main avenue was not more than eight
or ten feet wide. Every few steps other lofty and still narrower
crevices branched from it on either hand -- for McDougal's cave was but
a vast labyrinth of crooked aisles that ran into each other and out
again and led nowhere. It was said that one might wander days and nights
together through its intricate tangle of rifts and chasms, and never
an impossible thing. Most of the young men knew a portion of it, and it
was not customary to venture much beyond this known portion. Tom Sawyer
The procession moved along the main avenue some three-quarters of a
mile, and then groups and couples began to slip aside into branch
avenues, fly along the dismal corridors, and take each other by surprise
at points where the corridors joined again. Parties were able to elude
each other for the space of half an hour without going beyond the
By-and-by, one group after another came straggling back to the mouth of
adventures was romantic and therefore satisfactory. When the ferryboat
with her wild freight pushed into the stream, nobody cared sixpence for
Huck was already upon his watch when the ferry-boat's lights went
glinting past the wharf. He heard no noise on board, for the young
people were as subdued and still as people usually are who are nearly
tired to death. He wondered what boat it was, and why she did not stop
attention upon his business. The night was growing cloudy and dark. Ten
o'clock came, and the noise of vehicles ceased, scattered lights began
betook itself to its slumbers and left the small watcher alone with the
silence and the ghosts. Eleven o'clock came, and the tavern lights were
put out; darkness everywhere, now. Huck waited what seemed a weary long
time, but nothing happened. His faith was weakening. Was there any use?
door closed softly. He sprang to the corner of the brick store. The next
moment two men brushed by him, and one seemed to have something under
box and never be found again. No, he would stick to their wake and
follow them; he would trust to the darkness for security from discovery.
So communing with himself, Huck stepped out and glided along behind the
They moved up the river street three blocks, then turned to the left up
a cross-street. They went straight ahead, then, until they came to the
Welshman's house, half-way up the hill, without hesitating, and still
climbed upward. Good, thought Huck, they will bury it in the old quarry.
But they never stopped at the quarry. They passed on, up the summit.
They plunged into the narrow path between the tall sumach bushes, and
were at once hidden in the gloom. Huck closed up and shortened his
distance, now, for they would never be able to see him. He trotted along
awhile; then slackened his pace, fearing he was gaining too fast; moved
on a piece, then stopped altogether; listened; no sound; none, save that
he seemed to hear the beating of his own heart. The hooting of an owl
came over the hill -- ominous sound! But no footsteps. Heavens, was
everything lost! He was about to spring with winged feet, when a man
cleared his throat not four feet from him! Huck's heart shot into his
throat, but he swallowed it again; and then he stood there shaking as if
a dozen agues had taken charge of him at once, and so weak that he
thought he must surely fall to the ground. He knew where he was. He knew
he was within five steps of the stile leading into Widow Douglas'
grounds. Very well, he thought, let them bury it there; it won't be hard
Now there was a voice -- a very low voice -- Injun Joe's:
This was that stranger's voice -- the stranger of the haunted house. A
deadly chill went to Huck's heart -- this, then, was the ``revenge''
murder her. He wished he dared venture to warn her; but he knew he
didn't dare -- they might come and catch him. He thought all this and
more in the moment that elapsed between the stranger's remark and Injun
``Yes. Well, there IS company there, I reckon. Better give it up.''
``Give it up, and I just leaving this country forever! Give it up and
maybe never have another chance. I tell you again, as I've told you
was rough on me -- many times he was rough on me -- and mainly he was
the justice of the peace that jugged me for a vagrant. And that ain't
horsewhipped in front of the jail, like a nigger! -- with all the town
looking on! HORSEWHIPPED! -- do you understand? He took advantage of me
to the bed. If she bleeds to death, is that my fault? I'll not cry, if
her -- and then I reckon nobody'll ever know much about who done this
Huck felt that a silence was going to ensue -- a thing still more awful
than any amount of murderous talk; so he held his breath and stepped
gingerly back; planted his foot carefully and firmly, after balancing,
one-legged, in a precarious way and almost toppling over, first on one
elaboration and the same risks; then another and another, and -- a twig
snapped under his foot! His breath stopped and he listened. There was no
he turned in his tracks, between the walls of sumach bushes -- turned
but cautiously along. When he emerged at the quarry he felt secure, and
so he picked up his nimble heels and flew. Down, down he sped, till he
reached the Welshman's. He banged at the door, and presently the heads
``Please don't ever tell I told you,'' were Huck's first words when he
got in. ``Please don't -- I'd be killed, sure -- but the widow's been
Three minutes later the old man and his sons, well armed, were up the
hill, and just entering the sumach path on tiptoe, their weapons in
their hands. Huck accompanied them no further. He hid behind a great
bowlder and fell to listening. There was a lagging, anxious silence, and
then all of a sudden there was an explosion of firearms and a cry.
Huck waited for no particulars. He sprang away and sped down the hill as
AS the earliest suspicion of dawn appeared on Sunday morning, Huck came
groping up the hill and rapped gently at the old Welshman's door. The
inmates were asleep, but it was a sleep that was set on a hair-trigger,
on account of the exciting episode of the night. A call came from a
Huck's scared voice answered in a low tone:
These were strange words to the vagabond boy's ears, and the pleasantest
he had ever heard. He could not recollect that the closing word had ever
been applied in his case before. The door was quickly unlocked, and he
make yourself easy about that! I and the boys hoped you'd turn up and
where to put our hands on them, by your description; so we crept along
that sumach path was -- and just then I found I was going to sneeze. It
raised, and when the sneeze started those scoundrels a-rustling to get
those villains, and we after them, down through the woods. I judge we
sound of their feet we quit chasing, and went down and stirred up the
constables. They got a posse together, and went off to guard the river
``Oh, please don't tell ANYbody it was me that blowed on them! Oh,
Huck would not explain, further than to say that he already knew too
much about one of those men and would not have the man know that he knew
``How did you come to follow these fellows, lad? Were they looking
Huck was silent while he framed a duly cautious reply. Then he said:
and I don't see nothing agin it -- and sometimes I can't sleep much, on
account of thinking about it and sort of trying to strike out a new way
of doing. That was the way of it last night. I couldn't sleep, and so I
got to that old shackly brick store by the Temperance Tavern, I backed
these two chaps slipping along close by me, with something under their
wanted a light; so they stopped right before me and the cigars lit up
by his white whiskers and the patch on his eye, and t'other one was a
sneaked along so. I dogged 'em to the widder's stile, and stood in the
dark and heard the ragged one beg for the widder, and the Spaniard swear
Huck had made another terrible mistake! He was trying his best to keep
and yet his tongue seemed determined to get him into trouble in spite of
all the world. No -- I'd protect you -- I'd protect you. This Spaniard
can't cover that up now. You know something about that Spaniard that you
Huck looked into the old man's honest eyes a moment, then bent over and
The Welshman almost jumped out of his chair. In a moment he said:
``It's all plain enough, now. When you talked about notching ears and
slitting noses I judged that that was your own embellishment, because
During breakfast the talk went on, and in the course of it the old man
said that the last thing which he and his sons had done, before going to
bed, was to get a lantern and examine the stile and its vicinity for
marks of blood. They found none, but captured a bulky bundle of --
If the words had been lightning they could not have leaped with a more
stunning suddenness from Huck's blanched lips. His eyes were staring
wide, now, and his breath suspended -- waiting for the answer. The
Welshman started -- stared in return -- three seconds -- five seconds --
Huck sank back, panting gently, but deeply, unutterably grateful. The
Welshman eyed him gravely, curiously -- and presently said:
Huck was in a close place -- the inquiring eye was upon him -- he would
have given anything for material for a plausible answer -- nothing
suggested itself -- the inquiring eye was boring deeper and deeper -- a
senseless reply offered -- there was no time to weigh it, so at a
Poor Huck was too distressed to smile, but the old man laughed loud and
joyously, shook up the details of his anatomy from head to foot, and
ended by saying that such a laugh was money in a-man's pocket, because
wonder you're a little flighty and off your balance. But you'll come out
Huck was irritated to think he had been such a goose and betrayed such a
brought from the tavern was the treasure, as soon as he had heard the
talk at the widow's stile. He had only thought it was not the treasure,
he felt glad the little episode had happened, for now he knew beyond all
question that that bundle was not THE bundle, and so his mind was at
drifting just in the right direction, now; the treasure must be still in
No. 2, the men would be captured and jailed that day, and he and Tom
could seize the gold that night without any trouble or any fear of
Just as breakfast was completed there was a knock at the door. Huck
jumped for a hiding-place, for he had no mind to be connected even
remotely with the late event. The Welshman admitted several ladies and
gentlemen, among them the Widow Douglas, and noticed that groups of
citizens were climbing up the hill -- to stare at the stile. So the news
had spread. The Welshman had to tell the story of the night to the
visitors. The widow's gratitude for her preservation was outspoken.
``Don't say a word about it, madam. There's another that you're more
main matter -- but the Welshman allowed it to eat into the vitals of his
visitors, and through them be transmitted to the whole town, for he
``We judged it warn't worth while. Those fellows warn't likely to come
of waking you up and scaring you to death? My three negro men stood
There was no Sabbath-school during day-school vacation, but everybody
was early at church. The stirring event was well canvassed. News came
sermon was finished, Judge Thatcher's wife dropped alongside of Mrs.
Harper as she moved down the aisle with the crowd and said:
talking briskly with a friend, passed by. Aunt Polly said:
Mrs. Thatcher shook her head feebly and turned paler than ever.
stopped moving out of church. Whispers passed along, and a boding
uneasiness took possession of every countenance. Children were anxiously
questioned, and young teachers. They all said they had not noticed
whether Tom and Becky were on board the ferryboat on the homeward trip;
it was dark; no one thought of inquiring if any one was missing. One
young man finally blurted out his fear that they were still in the cave!
Mrs. Thatcher swooned away. Aunt Polly fell to crying and wringing her
street, and within five minutes the bells were wildly clanging and the
whole town was up! The Cardiff Hill episode sank into instant
were manned, the ferryboat ordered out, and before the horror was half
an hour old, two hundred men were pouring down highroad and river toward
All the long afternoon the village seemed empty and dead. Many women
visited Aunt Polly and Mrs. Thatcher and tried to comfort them. They
cried with them, too, and that was still better than words. All the
tedious night the town waited for news; but when the morning dawned at
food.'' Mrs. Thatcher was almost crazed; and Aunt Polly, also. Judge
candle-grease, smeared with clay, and almost worn out. He found Huck
Early in the forenoon parties of jaded men began to straggle into the
village, but the strongest of the citizens continued searching. All the
news that could be gained was that remotenesses of the cavern were being
ransacked that had never been visited before; that every corner and
crevice was going to be thoroughly searched; that wherever one wandered
through the maze of passages, lights were to be seen flitting hither and
thither in the distance, and shoutings and pistol-shots sent their
hollow reverberations to the ear down the sombre aisles. In one place,
far from the section usually traversed by tourists, the names ``BECKY &
TOM'' had been found traced upon the rocky wall with candle-smoke, and
near at hand a grease-soiled bit of ribbon. Mrs. Thatcher recognized the
precious, because this one parted latest from the living body before the
speck of light would glimmer, and then a glorious shout would burst
forth and a score of men go trooping down the echoing aisle -- and then
a sickening disappointment always followed; the children were not there;
Three dreadful days and nights dragged their tedious hours along, and
the village sank into a hopeless stupor. No one had heart for anything.
Temperance Tavern kept liquor on his premises, scarcely fluttered the
public pulse, tremendous as the fact was. In a lucid interval, Huck
feebly led up to the subject of taverns, and finally asked -- dimly
dreading the worst -- if anything had been discovered at the Temperance
Then nothing but liquor had been found; there would have been a great
powwow if it had been the gold. So the treasure was gone forever -- gone
These thoughts worked their dim way through Huck's mind, and under the
``There -- he's asleep, poor wreck. Tom Sawyer find it! Pity but
somebody could find Tom Sawyer! Ah, there ain't many left, now, that's
got hope enough, or strength enough, either, to go on searching.''
NOW to return to Tom and Becky's share in the picnic. They tripped along
the murky aisles with the rest of the company, visiting the familiar
names, such as ``The Drawing-Room,'' ``The Cathedral,'' ``Aladdin's
Palace,'' and so on. Presently the hide-and-seek frolicking began, and
Tom and Becky engaged in it with zeal until the exertion began to grow a
trifle wearisome; then they wandered down a sinuous avenue holding their
candles aloft and reading the tangled web-work of names, dates,
post-office addresses, and mottoes with which the rocky walls had been
frescoed (in candle-smoke). Still drifting along and talking, they
were not frescoed. They smoked their own names under an overhanging
of water, trickling over a ledge and carrying a limestone sediment with
it, had, in the slow-dragging ages, formed a laced and ruffled Niagara
in gleaming and imperishable stone. Tom squeezed his small body behind
it in order to illuminate it for Becky's gratification. He found that it
curtained a sort of steep natural stairway which was enclosed between
guidance, and started upon their quest. They wound this way and that,
far down into the secret depths of the cave, made another mark, and
branched off in search of novelties to tell the upper world about. In
one place they found a spacious cavern, from whose ceiling depended a
multitude of shining stalactites of the length and circumference of a
man's leg; they walked all about it, wondering and admiring, and
presently left it by one of the numerous passages that opened into it.
This shortly brought them to a bewitching spring, whose basin was
incrusted with a frostwork of glittering crystals; it was in the midst
of a cavern whose walls were supported by many fantastic pillars which
had been formed by the joining of great stalactites and stalagmites
together, the result of the ceaseless water-drip of centuries. Under the
roof vast knots of bats had packed themselves together, thousands in a
bunch; the lights disturbed the creatures and they came flocking down by
hundreds, squeaking and darting furiously at the candles. Tom knew their
ways and the danger of this sort of conduct. He seized Becky's hand and
hurried her into the first corridor that offered; and none too soon, for
a bat struck Becky's light out with its wing while she was passing out
of the cavern. The bats chased the children a good distance; but the
fugitives plunged into every new passage that offered, and at last got
rid of the perilous things. Tom found a subterranean lake, shortly,
which stretched its dim length away until its shape was lost in the
shadows. He wanted to explore its borders, but concluded that it would
deep stillness of the place laid a clammy hand upon the spirits of the
``Why, I didn't notice, but it seems ever so long since I heard any of
``Come to think, Becky, we are away down below them -- and I don't know
how far away north, or south, or east, or whichever it is. We couldn't
They started through a corridor, and traversed it in silence a long way,
glancing at each new opening, to see if there was anything familiar
about the look of it; but they were all strange. Every time Tom made an
examination, Becky would watch his face for an encouraging sign, and he
But he felt less and less hopeful with each failure, and presently began
to turn off into diverging avenues at sheer random, in desperate hope of
Profound silence; silence so deep that even their breathings were
conspicuous in the hush. Tom shouted. The call went echoing down the
empty aisles and died out in the distance in a faint sound that
``It is horrid, but I better, Becky; they might hear us, you know,'' and
The ``might'' was even a chillier horror than the ghostly laughter, it
so confessed a perishing hope. The children stood still and listened;
but there was no result. Tom turned upon the back track at once, and
hurried his steps. It was but a little while before a certain indecision
in his manner revealed another fearful fact to Becky -- he could not
``Becky, I was such a fool! Such a fool! I never thought we might want
She sank to the ground and burst into such a frenzy of crying that Tom
bosom, she clung to him, she poured out her terrors, her unavailing
regrets, and the far echoes turned them all to jeering laughter. Tom
begged her to pluck up hope again, and she said she could not. He fell
to blaming and abusing himself for getting her into this miserable
again, she would get up and follow wherever he might lead if only he
So they moved on again -- aimlessly -- simply at random -- all they
its nature to revive when the spring has not been taken out of it by age
By-and-by Tom took Becky's candle and blew it out. This economy meant so
much! Words were not needed. Becky understood, and her hope died again.
She knew that Tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in his
By-and-by, fatigue began to assert its claims; the children tried to pay
attention, for it was dreadful to think of sitting down when time was
grown to be so precious, moving, in some direction, in any direction,
was at least progress and might bear fruit; but to sit down was to
At last Becky's frail limbs refused to carry her farther. She sat down.
Tom rested with her, and they talked of home, and the friends there, and
the comfortable beds and, above all, the light! Becky cried, and Tom
tried to think of some way of comforting her, but all his encouragements
He sat looking into her drawn face and saw it grow smooth and natural
under the influence of pleasant dreams; and by-and-by a smile dawned and
rested there. The peaceful face reflected somewhat of peace and healing
into his own spirit, and his thoughts wandered away to bygone times and
dreamy memories. While he was deep in his musings, Becky woke up with a
breezy little laugh -- but it was stricken dead upon her lips, and a
``Oh, how COULD I sleep! I wish I never, never had waked! No! No, I
``I'm glad you've slept, Becky; you'll feel rested, now, and we'll find
``Maybe not, maybe not. Cheer up, Becky, and let's go on trying.''
that it seemed days and weeks, and yet it was plain that this could not
dripping water -- they must find a spring. They found one presently, and
hear Tom dissent. She could not understand it. They sat down, and Tom
``I saved it from the picnic for us to dream on, Tom, the way grown-up
She dropped the sentence where it was. Tom divided the cake and Becky
abundance of cold water to finish the feast with. By-and-by Becky
suggested that they move on again. Tom was silent a moment. Then he
``Well, then, Becky, we must stay here, where there's water to drink.
Becky gave loose to tears and wailings. Tom did what he could to comfort
``Tom, it might be dark then -- would they notice we hadn't come?''
``I don't know. But anyway, your mother would miss you as soon as they
A frightened look in Becky's face brought Tom to his senses and he saw
The children became silent and thoughtful. In a moment a new burst of
grief from Becky showed Tom that the thing in his mind had struck hers
also -- that the Sabbath morning might be half spent before Mrs.
Thatcher discovered that Becky was not at Mrs. Harper's.
The children fastened their eyes upon their bit of candle and watched it
melt slowly and pitilessly away; saw the half inch of wick stand alone
at last; saw the feeble flame rise and fall, climb the thin column of
smoke, linger at its top a moment, and then -- the horror of utter
she was crying in Tom's arms, neither could tell. All that they knew
a dead stupor of sleep and resumed their miseries once more. Tom said it
might be Sunday, now -- maybe Monday. He tried to get Becky to talk, but
her sorrows were too oppressive, all her hopes were gone. Tom said that
they must have been missed long ago, and no doubt the search was going
on. He would shout and maybe some one would come. He tried it; but in
the darkness the distant echoes sounded so hideously that he tried it no
The hours wasted away, and hunger came to torment the captives again. A
they seemed hungrier than before. The poor morsel of food only whetted
Both held their breath and listened. There was a sound like the
faintest, far-off shout. Instantly Tom answered it, and leading Becky by
the hand, started groping down the corridor in its direction. Presently
he listened again; again the sound was heard, and apparently a little
however, because pitfalls were somewhat common, and had to be guarded
feet deep, it might be a hundred -- there was no passing it at any rate.
listened; evidently the distant shoutings were growing more distant! a
moment or two more and they had gone altogether. The heart-sinking
misery of it! Tom whooped until he was hoarse, but it was of no use. He
talked hopefully to Becky; but an age of anxious waiting passed and no
The children groped their way back to the spring. The weary time dragged
on; they slept again, and awoke famished and woe-stricken. Tom believed
Now an idea struck him. There were some side passages near at hand. It
would be better to explore some of these than bear the weight of the
a projection, and he and Becky started, Tom in the lead, unwinding the
line as he groped along. At the end of twenty steps the corridor ended
in a ``jumping-off place.'' Tom got down on his knees and felt below,
and then as far around the corner as he could reach with his hands
right, and at that moment, not twenty yards away, a human hand, holding
and instantly that hand was followed by the body it belonged to -- Injun
out of sight. Tom wondered that Joe had not recognized his voice and
have disguised the voice. Without doubt, that was it, he reasoned. Tom's
fright weakened every muscle in his body. He said to himself that if he
had strength enough to get back to the spring he would stay there, and
nothing should tempt him to run the risk of meeting Injun Joe again. He
But hunger and wretchedness rise superior to fears in the long run.
Another tedious wait at the spring and another long sleep brought
changes. The children awoke tortured with a raging hunger. Tom believed
that it must be Wednesday or Thursday or even Friday or Saturday, now,
and that the search had been given over. He proposed to explore another
passage. He felt willing to risk Injun Joe and all other terrors. But
Becky was very weak. She had sunk into a dreary apathy and would not be
roused. She said she would wait, now, where she was, and die -- it would
chose; but she implored him to come back every little while and speak to
Tom kissed her, with a choking sensation in his throat, and made a show
of being confident of finding the searchers or an escape from the cave;
passages on his hands and knees, distressed with hunger and sick with
Petersburg still mourned. The lost children had not been found. Public
that had the petitioner's whole heart in it; but still no good news came
from the cave. The majority of the searchers had given up the quest and
gone back to their daily avocations, saying that it was plain the
children could never be found. Mrs. Thatcher was very ill, and a great
call her child, and raise her head and listen a whole minute at a time,
then lay it wearily down again with a moan. Aunt Polly had drooped into
village went to its rest on Tuesday night, sad and forlorn.
bells, and in a moment the streets were swarming with frantic half-clad
found!'' Tin pans and horns were added to the din, the population massed
itself and moved toward the river, met the children coming in an open
carriage drawn by shouting citizens, thronged around it, joined its
homeward march, and swept magnificently up the main street roaring
The village was illuminated; nobody went to bed again; it was the
greatest night the little town had ever seen. During the first half-hour
the saved ones and kissed them, squeezed Mrs. Thatcher's hand, tried to
speak but couldn't -- and drifted out raining tears all over the place.
Aunt Polly's happiness was complete, and Mrs. Thatcher's nearly so. It
would be complete, however, as soon as the messenger dispatched with the
great news to the cave should get the word to her husband. Tom lay upon
a sofa with an eager auditory about him and told the history of the
wonderful adventure, putting in many striking additions to adorn it
withal; and closed with a description of how he left Becky and went on
an exploring expedition; how he followed two avenues as far as his
speck that looked like daylight; dropped the line and groped toward it,
pushed his head and shoulders through a small hole, and saw the broad
Mississippi rolling by! And if it had only happened to be night he would
not have seen that speck of daylight and would not have explored that
labored with her and convinced her; and how she almost died for joy when
there and cried for gladness; how some men came along in a skiff and Tom
hailed them and told them their situation and their famished condition;
them rest till two or three hours after dark and then brought them home.
Before day-dawn, Judge Thatcher and the handful of searchers with him
were tracked out, in the cave, by the twine clews they had strung behind
Three days and nights of toil and hunger in the cave were not to be
bedridden all of Wednesday and Thursday, and seemed to grow more and
more tired and worn, all the time. Tom got about, a little, on Thursday,
did not leave her room until Sunday, and then she looked as if she had
passed through a wasting illness.
not be admitted to the bedroom; neither could he on Saturday or Sunday.
He was admitted daily after that, but was warned to keep still about his
to see that he obeyed. At home Tom learned of the Cardiff Hill event;
also that the ``ragged man's'' body had eventually been found in the
river near the ferry-landing; he had been drowned while trying to
visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough, now, to hear exciting
Judge and some friends set Tom to talking, and some one asked him
``Because I had its big door sheathed with boiler iron two weeks ago,
The water was brought and thrown into Tom's face.
WITHIN a few minutes the news had spread, and a dozen skiff-loads of men
with passengers, soon followed. Tom Sawyer was in the skiff that bore
When the cave door was unlocked, a sorrowful sight presented itself in
the dim twilight of the place. Injun Joe lay stretched upon the ground,
eyes had been fixed, to the latest moment, upon the light and the cheer
of the free world outside. Tom was touched, for he knew by his own
nevertheless he felt an abounding sense of relief and security, now,
which revealed to him in a degree which he had not fully appreciated
before how vast a weight of dread had been lying upon him since the day
he lifted his voice against this bloody-minded outcast.
Injun Joe's bowie-knife lay close by, its blade broken in two. The great
tedious labor; useless labor, too, it was, for the native rock formed a
sill outside it, and upon that stubborn material the knife had wrought
had been no stony obstruction there the labor would have been useless
still, for if the beam had been wholly cut away Injun Joe could not have
that place in order to be doing something -- in order to pass the weary
time -- in order to employ his tortured faculties. Ordinarily one could
find half a dozen bits of candle stuck around in the crevices of this
vestibule, left there by tourists; but there were none now. The prisoner
few bats, and these, also, he had eaten, leaving only their claws. The
poor unfortunate had starved to death. In one place, near at hand, a
stalagmite had been slowly growing up from the ground for ages, builded
by the water-drip from a stalactite overhead. The captive had broken off
the stalagmite, and upon the stump had placed a stone, wherein he had
scooped a shallow hollow to catch the precious drop that fell once in
dessertspoonful once in four and twenty hours. That drop was falling
British empire; when Columbus sailed; when the massacre at Lexington was
``news.'' It is falling now; it will still be falling when all these
things shall have sunk down the afternoon of history, and the twilight
of tradition, and been swallowed up in the thick night of oblivion. Has
everything a purpose and a mission? Did this drop fall patiently during
five thousand years to be ready for this flitting human insect's need?
and has it another important object to accomplish ten thousand years to
tourist stares longest at that pathetic stone and that slow-dropping
water when he comes to see the wonders of McDougal's cave. Injun Joe's
cup stands first in the list of the cavern's marvels; even ``Aladdin's
Injun Joe was buried near the mouth of the cave; and people flocked
there in boats and wagons from the towns and from all the farms and
hamlets for seven miles around; they brought their children, and all
This funeral stopped the further growth of one thing -- the petition to
the governor for Injun Joe's pardon. The petition had been largely
signed; many tearful and eloquent meetings had been held, and a
committee of sappy women been appointed to go in deep mourning and wail
around the governor, and implore him to be a merciful ass and trample
his duty under foot. Injun Joe was believed to have killed five citizens
would have been plenty of weaklings ready to scribble their names to a
an important talk. Huck had learned all about Tom's adventure from the
Welshman and the Widow Douglas, by this time, but Tom said he reckoned
there was one thing they had not told him; that thing was what he wanted
whiskey. Nobody told me it was you; but I just knowed it must 'a' ben
you, soon as I heard 'bout that whiskey business; and I knowed you
hadn't got the money becuz you'd 'a' got at me some way or other and
all right the Saturday I went to the picnic. Don't you remember you was
``Yes -- but you keep mum. I reckon Injun Joe's left friends behind him,
Then Huck told his entire adventure in confidence to Tom, who had only
``whoever nipped the whiskey in No. 2, nipped the money, too, I reckon
``Huck, we can do that without the least little bit of trouble in the
``Good as wheat! What makes you think the money's --''
agree to give you my drum and every thing I've got in the world. I will,
but there's a mighty short cut that they don't anybody but me know
down there, and I'll pull it back again all by myself. You needn't ever
``All right. We want some bread and meat, and our pipes, and a little
things they call lucifer matches. I tell you, many's the time I wished I
A trifle after noon the boys borrowed a small skiff from a citizen who
``Now you see this bluff here looks all alike all the way down from the
see that white place up yonder where there's been a landslide? Well,
Huck searched all the place about, and found nothing. Tom proudly
marched into a thick clump of sumach bushes and said:
country. You just keep mum about it. All along I've been wanting to be a
robber, but I knew I'd got to have a thing like this, and where to run
Sawyer's Gang -- it sounds splendid, don't it, Huck?''
``Money. You make them raise all they can, off'n their friends; and
women, but you don't kill them. They're always beautiful and rich, and
awfully scared. You take their watches and things, but you always take
after they've been in the cave a week or two weeks they stop crying and
``Why, it's real bully, Tom. I believe it's better'n to be a pirate.''
``Yes, it's better in some ways, because it's close to home and circuses
By this time everything was ready and the boys entered the hole, Tom in
the lead. They toiled their way to the farther end of the tunnel, then
made their spliced kite-strings fast and moved on. A few steps brought
showed Huck the fragment of candle-wick perched on a lump of clay
The boys began to quiet down to whispers, now, for the stillness and
gloom of the place oppressed their spirits. They went on, and presently
entered and followed Tom's other corridor until they reached the
``jumping-off place.'' The candles revealed the fact that it was not
really a precipice, but only a steep clay hill twenty or thirty feet
``Look as far around the corner as you can. Do you see that? There -- on
``NOW where's your Number Two? 'UNDER THE CROSS,' hey? Right yonder's
Huck stared at the mystic sign awhile, and then said with a shaky voice:
``Yes -- leave it. Injun Joe's ghost is round about there, certain.''
``No, Tom, it wouldn't. It would hang round the money. I know the ways
Tom began to fear that Huck was right. Misgivings gathered in his mind.
``Lookyhere, Huck, what fools we're making of ourselves! Injun Joe's
cross is. I reckon we'll climb down there and have a hunt for that
Tom went first, cutting rude steps in the clay hill as he descended.
Huck followed. Four avenues opened out of the small cavern which the
great rock stood in. The boys examined three of them with no result.
They found a small recess in the one nearest the base of the rock, with
a pallet of blankets spread down in it; also an old suspender, some
was no money-box. The lads searched and researched this place, but in
``He said UNDER the cross. Well, this comes nearest to being under the
cross. It can't be under the rock itself, because that sets solid on the
could suggest nothing. By-and-by Tom said:
``Lookyhere, Huck, there's footprints and some candle-grease on the clay
that for? I bet you the money IS under the rock. I'm going to dig in the
Huck began to dig and scratch now. Some boards were soon uncovered and
removed. They had concealed a natural chasm which led under the rock.
explore. He stooped and passed under; the narrow way descended
gradually. He followed its winding course, first to the right, then to
the left, Huck at his heels. Tom turned a short curve, by-and-by, and
It was the treasure-box, sure enough, occupying a snug little cavern,
along with an empty powder-keg, a couple of guns in leather cases, two
or three pairs of old moccasins, a leather belt, and some other rubbish
``Got it at last!'' said Huck, ploughing among the tarnished coins with
It weighed about fifty pounds. Tom could lift it, after an awkward
fashion, but could not carry it conveniently.
at the ha'nted house. I noticed that. I reckon I was right to think of
``No, Huck -- leave them there. They're just the tricks to have when we
orgies there, too. It's an awful snug place for orgies.''
``I dono. But robbers always have orgies, and of course we've got to
getting late, I reckon. I'm hungry, too. We'll eat and smoke when we get
out, found the coast clear, and were soon lunching and smoking in the
skiff. As the sun dipped toward the horizon they pushed out and got
under way. Tom skimmed up the shore through the long twilight, chatting
widow's woodshed, and I'll come up in the morning and we'll count it and
will be safe. Just you lay quiet here and watch the stuff till I run and
hook Benny Taylor's little wagon; I won't be gone a minute.''
He disappeared, and presently returned with the wagon, put the two small
dragging his cargo behind him. When the boys reached the Welshman's
house, they stopped to rest. Just as they were about to move on, the
``Good! Come along with me, boys, you are keeping everybody waiting.
not as light as it might be. Got bricks in it? -- or old metal?''
foundry than they would to make twice the money at regular work. But
that's human nature -- hurry along, hurry along!''
``Mr. Jones, we haven't been doing nothing.''
This question was not entirely answered in Huck's slow mind before he
found himself pushed, along with Tom, into Mrs. Douglas' drawing-room.
The place was grandly lighted, and everybody that was of any consequence
Rogerses, Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, the minister, the editor, and a great
heartily as any one could well receive two such looking beings. They
were covered with clay and candle-grease. Aunt Polly blushed crimson
Huck right at my door, and so I just brought them along in a hurry.''
shirts, socks, everything complete. They're Huck's -- no, no thanks,
Mary got your Sunday clothes ready, and everybody's been fretting about
``It's one of the widow's parties that she's always having. This time
helped her out of the other night. And say -- I can tell you something,
``Why, old Mr. Jones is going to try to spring something on the people
secret, but I reckon it's not much of a secret now. Everybody knows --
bound Huck should be here -- couldn't get along with his grand secret
``About Huck tracking the robbers to the widow's. I reckon Mr. Jones was
``Sid, there's only one person in this town mean enough to do that, and
hill and never told anybody on the robbers. You can't do any but mean
things, and you can't bear to see anybody praised for doing good ones.
There -- no thanks, as the widow says'' -- and Tom cuffed Sid's ears and
helped him to the door with several kicks. ``Now go and tell auntie if
Some minutes later the widow's guests were at the supper-table, and a
dozen children were propped up at little side-tables in the same room,
after the fashion of that country and that day. At the proper time Mr.
Jones made his little speech, in which he thanked the widow for the
honor she was doing himself and his sons, but said that there was
And so forth and so on. He sprung his secret about Huck's share in the
adventure in the finest dramatic manner he was master of, but the
surprise it occasioned was largely counterfeit and not as clamorous and
effusive as it might have been under happier circumstances. However, the
widow made a pretty fair show of astonishment, and heaped so many
nearly intolerable discomfort of his new clothes in the entirely
The widow said she meant to give Huck a home under her roof and have him
educated; and that when she could spare the money she would start him in
Nothing but a heavy strain upon the good manners of the company kept
back the due and proper complimentary laugh at this pleasant joke. But
Oh, you needn't smile -- I reckon I can show you. You just wait a
Tom entered, struggling with the weight of his sacks, and Aunt Polly did
not finish her sentence. Tom poured the mass of yellow coin upon the
The spectacle took the general breath away. All gazed, nobody spoke for
a moment. Then there was a unanimous call for an explanation. Tom said
interest. There was scarcely an interruption from any one to break the
``I thought I had fixed up a little surprise for this occasion, but it
don't amount to anything now. This one makes it sing mighty small, I'm
The money was counted. The sum amounted to a little over twelve thousand
before, though several persons were there who were worth considerably
gloated over, glorified, until the reason of many of the citizens
tottered under the strain of the unhealthy excitement. Every ``haunted''
plank by plank, and its foundations dug up and ransacked for hidden
treasure -- and not by boys, but men -- pretty grave, unromantic men,
remarks had possessed weight before; but now their sayings were
regarded as remarkable; they had evidently lost the power of doing and
saying commonplace things; moreover, their past history was raked up and
discovered to bear marks of conspicuous originality. The village paper
The Widow Douglas put Huck's money out at six per cent., and Judge
minister got -- no, it was what he was promised -- he generally couldn't
collect it. A dollar and a quarter a week would board, lodge, and school
a boy in those old simple days -- and clothe him and wash him, too, for
Judge Thatcher had conceived a great opinion of Tom. He said that no
commonplace boy would ever have got his daughter out of the cave. When
Becky told her father, in strict confidence, how Tom had taken her
whipping at school, the Judge was visibly moved; and when she pleaded
grace for the mighty lie which Tom had told in order to shift that
whipping from her shoulders to his own, the Judge said with a fine
outburst that it was a noble, a generous, a magnanimous lie -- a lie
breast to breast with George Washington's lauded Truth about the
hatchet! Becky thought her father had never looked so tall and so superb
as when he walked the floor and stamped his foot and said that. She went
National Military Academy and afterward trained in the best law school
protection introduced him into society -- no, dragged him into it,
hurled him into it -- and his sufferings were almost more than he could
bear. The widow's servants kept him clean and neat, combed and brushed,
and they bedded him nightly in unsympathetic sheets that had not one
little spot or stain which he could press to his heart and know for a
talk so properly that speech was become insipid in his mouth;
whithersoever he turned, the bars and shackles of civilization shut him
He bravely bore his miseries three weeks, and then one day turned up
missing. For forty-eight hours the widow hunted for him everywhere in
great distress. The public were profoundly concerned; they searched high
and low, they dragged the river for his body. Early the third morning
Tom Sawyer wisely went poking among some old empty hogsheads down behind
Huck had slept there; he had just breakfasted upon some stolen odds and
blamed clothes that just smothers me, Tom; they don't seem to any air
git through 'em, somehow; and they're so rotten nice that I can't set
and sweat and sweat -- I hate them ornery sermons! I can't ketch a fly
wouldn't let me yell, she wouldn't let me gape, nor stretch, nor
scratch, before folks --'' [Then with a spasm of special irritation and
injury] -- ``And dad fetch it, she prayed all the time! I never see such
stand THAT, Tom. Looky-here, Tom, being rich ain't what it's cracked up
to be. It's just worry and worry, and sweat and sweat, and a-wishing you
was dead all the time. Now these clothes suits me, and this bar'l suits
just take my sheer of it along with your'n, and gimme a ten-center
sometimes -- not many times, becuz I don't give a dern for a thing
smothery houses. I like the woods, and the river, and hogsheads, and
``Lookyhere, Huck, being rich ain't going to keep me back from turning
pirate is -- as a general thing. In most countries they're awful high up
say? Why, they'd say, 'Mph! Tom Sawyer's Gang! pretty low characters in
Huck was silent for some time, engaged in a mental struggle. Finally he
``Well, I'll go back to the widder for a month and tackle it and see if
of the roughest things, I'll smoke private and cuss private, and crowd
through or bust. When you going to start the gang and turn robbers?''
``It's to swear to stand by one another, and never tell the gang's
secrets, even if you're chopped all to flinders, and kill anybody and
in the lonesomest, awfulest place you can find -- a ha'nted house is the
``Now, that's something LIKE! Why, it's a million times bullier than
pirating. I'll stick to the widder till I rot, Tom; and if I git to be a
reg'lar ripper of a robber, and everybody talking 'bout it, I reckon
stop here; the story could not go much further without becoming the
history of a MAN. When one writes a novel about grown people, he knows
exactly where to stop -- that is, with a marriage; but when he writes of
Most of the characters that perform in this book still live, and are
story of the younger ones again and see what sort of men and women they
turned out to be; therefore it will be wisest not to reveal any of that
weikuan@bluenose:~/csci2132/a2$ ei[D[Kxit
exit

Script done on 2016Âπ¥09Êúà28Êó• ÊòüÊúü‰∏â 15Êó∂33ÂàÜ42Áßí
